Introduction

Seattle is a growing city. We use this Comprehensive Plan to manage growth in a way that
benefits all of the city’s residents and preserves the surrounding natural environment.
Seattle’s recent building boom is a reminder of how desirable Seattle is as a place to live
and work. Since the Plan was first adopted in 1994, the City has worked to accommodate
new people and businesses, while at the same time looking for ways the city can
continue to be livable for future generations. Further growth will present challenges and
opportunities similar to the ones we have faced in the recent past. The City has created this
Plan as a guide to help it make decisions about managing growth equitably over the next
twenty years.




2

The City in the Region
With the most people and jobs of any city in Washington State, Seattle is the center of the
fast-growing Central Puget Sound region. Made up of King, Snohomish, Pierce, and Kitsap
Counties, this dynamic metropolitan region expects its population to exceed five million
by 2040. Seattle hosts many of the region’s largest employers, including the University of
Washington and major medical facilities. It also contains cultural attractions such as the
Seattle Symphony, the Northwest Folklife Festival, and professional sports teams, and
serves as the focal point of the region’s multiple transit systems.
Over the past decade, the city has grown rapidly, adding an average of about four thousand
housing units and seven thousand people each year. In the years to come, Seattle expects
to accommodate a significant share of the region’s growth. This Plan contains goals and
policies designed to guide growth in a manner that reflects the City’s core values and that
enhances the quality of life for all.

What Drives This Plan
Seattle’s Core Values

Before Seattle’s Comprehensive Plan was first drafted in the early 1990s, City staff and the
Planning Commission held numerous community meetings, with the intention of inviting
more people into the conversation and hearing from groups who hadn’t always been at
the table. The goal of City staff and the Commission was to identify the values that people
cared most about. The principles that emerged from these conversations came to be known
as the core values for the Comprehensive Plan, and they are still valid. This version of the
Plan honors the efforts of those past participants and holds the same values at its center.
Race and Social Equity. Seattle believes that every resident should have the opportunity to thrive and to be a part of the city’s growing economy. In 2015 the mayor and the
City Council adopted a resolution that changed the title of this value from “social equity”
to “race and social equity,” to emphasize the need to address disparities experienced
by people of color. In 2016, at Council’s request, the Office of Planning and Community
Development developed the Growth and Equity Analysis. The results of the Growth and
Equity Analysis inform elected officials and the public about potential future displacement
impacts of the recommended Growth Strategy on marginalized populations; and strategies
for mitigating identified impacts and increasing access to opportunity for marginalized
populations.




3

Historically in the city of Seattle and throughout the nation, people have been denied equal
access to education, jobs, homes, and neighborhoods because of their race, class, disabilities, or other real or perceived differences. While such practices are now illegal, some groups
still do not enjoy access to the same job opportunities, security, and freedoms that other
Seattle residents have. The benefits and burdens of growth are not distributed equitably.
Seattle has not yet achieved social equity for all who live and work in our city, and statistics
have shown that this is particularly true for people of color.
These inequities have become more significant as the makeup of Seattle’s population has
changed. The city has gone from being 25 percent people of color in 1990 to 34 percent
in 2010, and this trend is expected to continue. More immigrants will arrive, and minority
populations will continue to grow through natural increase. The map on the following page
shows locations in the city where there are concentrations of people of color.

L Photo © John Skelton R Photo © Briana N, Youth in Focus student

With more people moving into the city, property values could increase or existing buildings
and homes could be replaced with new and more expensive ones. Changes like these will
affect some communities more than others and could make it more difficult for residents
or businesses to remain in their current neighborhoods, especially in low-income areas. In
some cases these outcomes are unavoidable, but the City must try to help existing residents
and businesses remain part of our growing and changing community.




4

2010 Population
by major racial category and Hispanic/Latino ethnicity





5

Since the early 2000s, the City has worked to implement a race and social justice initiative, a
citywide effort to make racial equity a reality. This version of the Comprehensive Plan marks
a renewed and strengthened commitment to that goal.
The main goal of the Comprehensive Plan is to guide the physical development of the city.
However, in shaping how we create new spaces for people to live, work, and play, this Plan
also aims to give all Seattle residents better access to jobs, education, affordable housing,
parks, community centers, and healthy food.
In 2016, the City published a report titled Growth and Equity. That report compiles data
about several economic and demographic factors that help identify places in the city where
residents, especially people of color and low-income residents, could be at risk of displacement or where there is less access to employment and other opportunities. The City used
information from this report to shape this Plan’s preferred pattern of growth, as described in
the Growth Strategy Element. The City will continue to monitor the conditions contained in
the report.
The goals and policies in this Plan can also influence the actions of other government
agencies and private businesses to promote social justice and racial equity. Working toward
equity will help produce stronger and more resilient economic growth—growth that benefits everyone.

Seattle is a city where much of the population enjoys comfortable to very high
incomes, yet roughly one out of seven
Seattleites has an income below the
poverty line. In Seattle, the poverty rate
for people of color is more than two and
a half times that for whites. High rates
of poverty among single-parent families, people with disabilities, and other
demographic groups reveal additional
disparities in the well-being of Seattle
residents.

Poverty in Seattle
Percentage with incomes below poverty level
Overall population:
White, non-Hispanic population
Population categories with especially high poverty rates:
People of color
People with disabilities
Women age 75 or over living alone or with nonrelatives
Foreign-born people
Family households:
Families with especially high poverty rates:
Single-parent, female-headed families

14%
9%
24%
29%
27%
23%
8%
33%

Source: 2011–2013 ACS, US Census Bureau.
Notes: Some people (for example, people living in college dormitories and people
who are institutionalized) are not included in poverty rate calculations.

The discussions that introduce sections of this Plan highlight other facts about some conditions or services as they relate to the income or racial characteristics of people in Seattle.
Environmental Stewardship. Even as the city becomes increasingly urban, Seattle is ded-

icated to protecting and restoring the green spaces and water that make our city special.
Between the time the Plan was first adopted and 2015, Seattle has accommodated more





6

than its expected share of countywide residential growth—adding more than sixty-seven
thousand new housing units, compared to the original Plan’s estimate of fifty thousand
to sixty thousand. This has helped reduce the proportion of countywide housing growth
in rural areas from about 15 percent in the 1980s to less than 2 percent in recent years. By
taking on a significant share of the region’s growth, Seattle has helped protect rural farms
and forests from development. And by concentrating growth in urban villages, we help preserve the existing green areas in the city, including the areas that now contain low-density
development.
The City has committed to make Seattle carbon neutral by the year 2050 in order to reduce
the threat of climate change. To reach this ambitious and important goal, local government, businesses, and residents will need to work together. Seattle’s Climate Action Plan
provides long-term planning direction and guidance for climate protection and adaptation
efforts through 2030. This Plan contains consistent goals and policies to help guide this effort. For instance, the Growth Strategy and Transportation elements promote development
that will make walking, biking, and public transit viable options for more people so that
they can be less reliant on automobiles—a major source of carbon emissions in this region.
Seattle charged the 2012 Green Ribbon Commission to help create a climate action plan
that increases the circle of economic prosperity, affordable housing, public health, and social equity while protecting our planet for future generations. Seattle’s Climate Action Plan
provides long-term planning direction and guidance for climate protection and adaptation
efforts through 2030.
Community. Seattle is made up of many small communities, where people bond because
of shared interests or backgrounds. Each of the small communities is a crucial part of the
whole, and all the communities working together is what makes the larger Seattle community thrive.

To prepare this Plan and previous versions of it, hundreds of people participated in meetings, filled out comment forms, and wrote e-mails and letters to the City. Among the diverse
groups of people who call Seattle home, there were many different—and often competing—
interests and perspectives. Yet there was one goal in common: to make Seattle the best
city for living, working, and raising families. This Plan encourages continued broad public
participation in decisions that affect all aspects of the city.
Economic Opportunity and Security. Seattle recovered from the great recession and

grew beyond 2008’s high employment levels, and by 2014 the city contained 514,700 jobs.
Boeing and Amazon have been major contributors to that employment growth, but other,
smaller businesses have also provided new jobs.
For businesses to thrive, they need skilled employees and space to grow. For specific examples of how this Plan addresses economic opportunity, look in the Growth Strategy and
Land Use elements. These elements include policies that identify locations for employment




7

growth and give ideas for how to direct growth there. The Economic Development element
encourages businesses to put down roots and expand, while the Community Well-Being
element talks about helping people get the kind of education and skills they will need to fill
the newly created jobs.
Sometimes, just having a job isn’t enough. Even when employed, many people may not be
able to afford to live in the city. Through this Plan, the City demonstrates its commitment to
promoting livable wages and giving people equal opportunities. The City has also developed programs to help address continuing racial disparities in education and employment.

Photo © John Skelton
Sustainability

The Plan has been guided by the principle of sustainability. One definition of sustainable development is “development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the
ability of future generations to meet their own needs.” This Plan presents ways to sustain
the natural environment by directing more urban growth into Seattle in order to preserve
forests and farmlands outside the city. The concept of sustainability also applies to the
urban environment, where the City uses its funds efficiently by limiting the number of places





8

where it encourages significant growth. This principle is still an important guide to how the
Plan is written and how it will be implemented.
Washington’s Growth Management Act

The state Growth Management Act (GMA), enacted in 1990, requires counties and larger
cities to create comprehensive plans and update those plans regularly. The GMA’s goals
include reducing sprawl and directing growth to areas that already have water, sewer, transportation, and other urban services. The GMA calls on each county to draw what is called an
urban-growth boundary. Urban-style development is not allowed outside that boundary.
Comprehensive plans must show that each city has enough land with the right zoning to absorb the growth that is expected to occur over the next twenty years. Cities must also plan
for the housing, transportation, water, sewer, and other facilities that will be needed. The
GMA requires that plans be consistent with other plans in the region. In this region, other
plans include Vision 2040 and the King County Countywide Planning Policies.
Vision 2040

The Puget Sound Regional Council (PSRC) is the regional growth management, transportation, and economic development organization covering King, Snohomish, Pierce, and
Kitsap Counties. It is governed by elected officials from across the region. Together these
officials have created a regional growth strategy called Vision 2040, which recommends that
new jobs and residents should be directed to designated centers connected with high-capacity transit. Seattle’s Plan identifies six regional growth centers and two manufacturing/
industrial centers that are recognized in the regional plan. Consistent with the regional
growth strategy, the Plan contains housing- and job-growth targets for each of those centers. Vision 2040 also assumes a distribution of growth across the Puget Sound region, with
especially large shares of growth going to the five metropolitan cities—Seattle, Bellevue,
Everett, Tacoma, and Bremerton. This Plan reflects Seattle’s commitment to accommodate
its share of growth as the metropolitan city at the heart of the region.
The PSRC often describes Vision 2040 as enhancing people, the planet, and prosperity. This
Plan addresses those same aspects of growth through policies that renew the emphasis
on race and social equity, draw growth to areas of the city where public facilities exist, set
rules for protecting environmentally critical areas, promote nonautomobile travel, attract
diverse job growth, focus on education and job training to help people participate in the
region’s economy, and provide affordable housing through a number of local tools.
The PSRC brought together representatives from local governments and the private sector
to develop guidelines for how to plan for areas around light rail stations. The result was
the Growing Transit Communities Regional Compact, a regional agreement that proposed
ways to make sure that everyone, including lower-income people and communities of color,
would benefit from the new transit system and other improvements that occur around it.




9

King County Countywide Planning Policies

In King County, the Growth Management Planning Council is made up of elected officials
representing all the jurisdictions. They have worked together to develop the Countywide
Planning Policies (CPPs), which provide guidance for the comprehensive plans that the
cities in King County must adopt. The CPPs contain twenty-year housing- and job-growth
targets for each jurisdiction. Those targets are what this Plan is designed to address. The
CPPs also address the need for affordable housing in the county, for local action to address
climate change, and for growing in ways that will create healthy communities.
Seattle’s Urban Village Strategy

The foundation of Seattle’s Comprehensive Plan is the urban village strategy. It is the City’s
unique approach to meeting the state GMA requirement, and it is similar to Vision 2040’s
growth centers approach. This strategy encourages most future job and housing growth to
occur in specific areas in the city that are best able to absorb and capitalize on that growth.
These are also the best places for efficiently providing essential public services and making
amenities available to residents. These areas include designated urban centers, such as
Downtown and the five others (First Hill/Capitol Hill, South Lake Union, Uptown, University
District, and Northgate) recognized in the regional plan. In addition, this Plan designates
twenty-four urban villages throughout the city. Both urban centers and urban villages are
places that already have active business districts and concentrations of housing. The urban
village strategy
•
•
•
•
•

accommodates Seattle’s expected growth in an orderly and predictable way;
strengthens existing business districts;
promotes the most efficient use of public investments, now and in the future;
encourages more walking, bicycling, and transit use; and
retains the character of less dense residential neighborhoods outside of urban villages.

By encouraging both business and housing growth in the urban centers and urban villages,
the Plan makes it possible for more people to live near job opportunities and near services
that can meet their everyday needs. In this way, more people are able to walk or bike to
some of their daily activities, leading to more activity on the sidewalks and fewer vehicles
on the streets, and making these communities more vibrant. The urban village strategy also
puts more people near transit service so that they can more easily use buses or light rail to
get to other job centers, shopping, or entertainment. This access is useful for all residents,
but particularly those with limited incomes or physical limitations that make them reliant
on public transit.





10

L Photo © Mackenzie M, Youth in Focus student. R Photo © John Skelton

The urban village strategy puts into practice the regional growth center concept called for
in regional plans, but at a more local scale. In addition to the regionally recognized urban
centers, the Plan identifies two categories of urban villages, each intended to combine
housing with employment opportunities, shops, and services, all in compact environments
that encourage walking. The Plan identifies six hub urban villages where a fair amount of
housing and employment growth should occur, though at lower densities than in the centers. It also identifies eighteen residential urban villages scattered around the city where
modest housing growth should occur near retailers and services that mainly serve the
nearby population.
All of the urban centers and villages identified in the Plan function the way the regional
plans anticipate: as compact, pedestrian-friendly areas that offer different mixes of office,
commercial, civic, entertainment, and residential uses, but at scales that respect Seattle’s
character and development pattern.
The urban village strategy has been successful in achieving its purposes over the twenty-some years it has been in place. During that time, over 75 percent of the city’s new housing and new jobs were located inside the urban centers and villages that together make up
only about 17 percent of the city’s total land area. (See the map on the following page.) More
than half of the housing growth occurred in the six urban centers.
More of the urban villages are thriving now than in 1994, when the strategy was first adopted. Columbia City, Ballard, and Madison/Miller are just a few of the neighborhoods where




11

Housing Units Built 1995–2014


12

added residents and new businesses have meant more people out on the sidewalks, enjoying their communities and raising the overall vitality of each area. The villages continue to
provide new services and goods for residents in nearby areas, and this means that community members have less distance to travel to get what they need and want. However, the
long-sought prosperity in these communities has sometimes come at the cost of changing
the character of the neighborhoods and forcing some former residents and businesses to
leave. Those who left were often lower-income households, whose housing was replaced
by more expensive new buildings or who could not afford the rising rents brought on by the
neighborhood changes. In defining the future success of the urban village strategy, the City
will try to plan ways for the urban villages to include opportunities for marginalized populations to remain in the city and to access education and affordable housing.
In many of the urban villages, ridership on King County Metro buses has outpaced the population growth, and several of these villages have benefited from the light rail service that
first opened in 2009, providing another option for traveling without a car.
Of course, urban villages are more than just the fulfillment of the regional growth strategy;
they are neighborhoods where Seattle residents live, work, learn, shop, play, and socialize.
After initial adoption of the Plan, the City engaged in a citywide neighborhood-planning
effort that produced a neighborhood plan for each area of the city containing an urban center or urban village. Those neighborhood plans found some common themes for improvement among the different communities and also highlighted some needs that were unique
to each of those neighborhoods. To address the common themes, voters approved funding
for libraries, open spaces, community centers, and transit. Since the neighborhood plans
were first adopted, the City has worked with communities to refine more than half of those
plans and help take action to accomplish the goals that each community prioritized.


Forecasts suggest that over the next twenty years, Seattle will need to accommodate 70,000
additional housing units, 120,000 more residents, and 115,000 additional jobs. This updated version of the Plan builds on the success of the urban village strategy to encourage that
growth to occur in a manner that works for all of the city’s people. Most urban centers and
villages have continued to grow rapidly during the recent building boom, and current zoning allows them to handle even more growth. The City expects that between now and 2035,
most housing and employment growth will occur in those urban centers and villages.
In addition, light rail service in Seattle now provides certain areas of the city with more
frequent and reliable transit connections to a greater number of locations. Light rail already
connects the University of Washington, Capitol Hill, Downtown, Southeast Seattle neighborhoods, and the airport. By 2021 it will reach Roosevelt and Northgate, and by 2023, it will





13

stretch to Lynnwood and the Eastside. By 2035, there could be even more light rail lines in
the city.
In 2014, voters in Seattle approved a levy that funds additional Metro bus service in the
city. This increased transit service represents major investments and commitment to many
Seattle neighborhoods, and is an opportunity that Seattle should not waste. To leverage
this investment to the fullest extent, the Plan calls for focusing more growth in areas within
a ten-minute walk of light rail stations and in locations with very good bus service.
As mentioned above, the City has committed to be carbon neutral by the year 2050. This
Plan spans a critical time for the City in meeting that goal, and it provides some of the direction necessary to assist the City in achieving it.
Who We Are Planning For

This Plan is for the people who live in, work in, and visit Seattle today. It is also for those
who will make up the community of Seattle in the future—not only our children but also the
newcomers who will arrive for education or job opportunities and who will value the urban
and natural features of Seattle as much as we do.
While we have an idea of how many new housing units and jobs the City should expect over
the next twenty years, it is harder to know more specific information about the ages, incomes, and family structures of those future residents and workers, and to get a real picture
of who our new neighbors might be.
The US Census and other sources give us a good description of the city’s current population and information about recent trends that help offer a general picture of the future
population.
Seattle’s population in 2016 is estimated to be 686,800, and growth over the next twenty
years will add about 120,000 people to that total. Seattle’s population is younger than the
population in the surrounding region, with a higher percentage of twenty-somethings in the
city than in King County as a whole. However, Seattle has a much lower percentage of people below the age of eighteen than does the rest of King County. In fact, Seattle’s percentage
of households containing children is one of the lowest among large cities in the United
States. The age differences in Seattle households are even more dramatic in urban centers.
The average number of people living in a household in Seattle (2.06) is also lower than in
King County (2.39). Seattle’s household size has been decreasing since the 1960s, but the
rate of that decrease has slowed in the past twenty years. Household size could continue to
decline slowly in the future.





14

Just as Seattle’s current population is younger than that of the surrounding areas, Seattle’s
older population is growing at a slower rate than that of other parts of King County. Still,
in the future, we can expect that there will be more seniors living in the city than there are
today, as the baby boom generation ages.

2010 percentages of population by age and gender

Seattle is becoming more racially and culturally diverse. 2014 estimates from the American
Community Survey indicate that almost a fifth of Seattle residents were born in another
country and that close to a quarter of residents speak a language other than English at
home. The Seattle school district reports that among all of its students, 120 languages
are spoken. The growing diversity in the city’s population poses new challenges for City
departments and other institutions as they strive to meet the needs of all residents. It also
provides an opportunity to benefit from the cultures and skills of the people who make up
these groups.
This Plan provides policy direction for locating new housing units and encourages a variety
of housing types that can help meet the needs of diverse households who may be looking
for studios, larger apartments, town houses, highrise apartments, or detached houses. By
planning for more transportation choices, including bicycles and transit, the Plan will shape a
city attractive to many potential future residents. This can include today’s twenty-somethings
who choose to remain in the city as they begin to have families, aging residents hoping to
grow old in the place they’ve called home, and those who rely on transit for getting around.
At the same time, the Plan’s policies can make the city attractive to those critical businesses
that provide jobs and services for Seattle residents.
Defining and Measuring Success

This Plan specifically covers the next twenty years of growth in Seattle, but the city is expected to continue growing beyond that time period. There will always be ways the city can
improve to meet changing needs and to address ongoing concerns. Because of the changing nature of our region and our city, the success of this Plan is not measured by an ideal





15

end state. Instead, success is measured by whether we are moving in the directions the Plan
lays out.
The Plan covers many topics in several chapters, and monitoring progress on every one of
those topics would be a time-consuming and demanding task. To simplify the monitoring
process, the City has identified several indicators that will provide insights about progress
on key issues addressed by the Plan. The City will collect baseline data and track these indicators over time. Indicators will be tracked for the city as a whole and for each urban village
as feasible to help assess progress in implementing the Growth Strategy. The City will report
regularly on changes in these indicators to help the public and elected officials judge the
effectiveness of the Plan and the City’s actions to implement it. These indicators include:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

the number of new housing units;
the number of demolished housing units;
the number of jobs;
the number of income- and rent-restricted affordable housing units;
access to frequent transit service;
presence of sidewalks;
the number of households with access to open space;
City infrastructure investment; and
housing costs.

In addition to monitoring the items listed above, the City will use other indicators to help
gauge how well it is doing in making the city a more equitable place. This set of indicators will help show where in the city marginalized populations are at higher risk of being
displaced by development; it will also include measures of housing affordability and other
long term equitable development outcomes.
Demographics, including age, race and ethnicity, and household composition will be reported as part of these monitoring efforts, and information on household income levels will be
included along with the equitable development indicators.
Developing and Updating This Plan

Seattle first adopted this Comprehensive Plan in 1994 after a multiyear effort during which
residents throughout the city considered ways to shape the future of the city and to accommodate expected growth. Advisory committees, as well as public meetings and events,
helped validate the urban village strategy.
The process that produced this current version of the Plan also involved much consultation
with the public through a variety of meetings, events, and online conversations.





16

The GMA limits the City to amending the Plan only once each year, with exceptions for
certain types of amendments that can be considered at any time, such as adoption of a new
neighborhood plan or incorporation of the Shoreline Master Program. Since the Plan was
first adopted, the City has amended it every year through a regular process that is defined in
a City Council resolution. State law requires that the City review and update the Plan every
eight years.

Application and Implementation of the Plan
The principal purpose of this Comprehensive Plan is to provide policies that guide the
development of the city in the context of regional growth management. Community members and officials from all levels of government can look to these policies when planning
for growth. The City will use the Plan to help make decisions about proposed ordinances,
capital budgets, policies, and programs. Although the City will use the Plan to direct the development of regulations that govern land use and development, it will not use the Plan to
review applications for specific development projects, except when an applicable development regulation expressly requires reference to this Comprehensive Plan.
Each element of this Plan generally presents goals followed by policies related to those
goals and may also include a discussion about the goals and policies. Some chapters also
have appendices. Each of these components is defined as follows.
Goals represent the results that the City hopes to realize over time, perhaps within the
twenty-year life of the Plan, except where interim time periods are stated. Whether expressed in terms of numbers or only as directions for future change, goals are aspirations,
not guarantees or mandates.
Policies should be read as if preceded by the words It is the City’s general policy to. A policy

helps to guide the creation of or changes to specific rules or strategies (such as development regulations, budgets, or program plans). City officials will generally make decisions
on specific City actions by following ordinances, resolutions, budgets, or program plans
that themselves reflect relevant Plan policies, rather than by referring directly to this Plan.
Implementation of most policies involves a range of actions over time, so one cannot simply ask whether a specific action or project would fulfill a particular Plan policy. For example, a policy that states that the City will give priority to a particular need indicates that the
City will treat the need as important, not that it will take precedence in every City decision.
Some policies use the words shall, should, ensure, encourage, and so forth. In general, such
words describe the emphasis that the policy places on the action but do not necessarily
establish a specific legal duty to perform a particular act, to undertake a program or project,
or to achieve a specific result.





17

Some policies may appear to conflict with each other, particularly in the context of a specific situation or when viewed from the perspectives of people whose interests may conflict
with a given policy. A classic example is the often-referenced “conflict” between policies
calling for preservation of the environment and policies that promote economic development. Because Plan policies do not exist in isolation and must be viewed in the context of
all potentially relevant policies, it is largely in applying these policies that the interests are
reconciled and balanced by the legislative and executive branches of City government.
In the event that a conflict arises between another City policy and this Plan, the Plan will
generally prevail.
Discussions are provided to explain the context in which decisions on goals and policies

have been made, the reasons for those decisions, and how the goals and policies are related. The discussion portions of the Plan do not establish or modify policies; rather, they are
intended to help explain or interpret policies.
Appendices to the Plan contain certain maps, inventories, and other information required

by the GMA, and, in some cases, provide further data and discussion or analysis. The appendices are not to be read as establishing or modifying policies or requirements unless specified for such purposes in the Plan policies. For example, descriptions of current programs
in an appendix do not require that these programs be continued, and detailed estimates
of how the City may expect to achieve certain goals do not establish additional goals or
requirements.
Implementing the Plan

The City carries the Plan forward through development regulations, functional plans,
and investments. For instance, the City’s Land Use Code is a compilation of development
regulations that guide how land in the city can be used. The Land Use element of this Plan
provides the general direction for regulations that appear in the Land Use Code. Similarly,
the Transportation element of this Plan provides direction for the Bicycle Master Plan and
Transit Master Plan, which help implement the Plan’s transportation policies. The illustration on the next page shows the relationship among various City plans, this Plan, and
regional plans.
While the City adopts regulations and plans for the various functions it performs, the private
sector and other government agencies also help shape the city in significant ways. For
example, the private sector builds most of the new housing and commercial space in the
city, King County provides bus service, Sound Transit builds and provides light rail service, the school district builds and operates schools, the Port of Seattle operates shipping
terminals that bring international trade to the city and the region, and the Washington State
Department of Transportation builds and maintains state highways in the city. The City
partners with these agencies to help them make decisions that best serve the City’s goals.





18

Implementation of this Plan is therefore a broadly shared effort that relies on the continued
involvement of many individuals and institutions in the city and the region.





19

Growth Management Act
Statewide Goals/Policies
Guidance for Citywide Comprehensive Plans

PSRC Vision 2040
Regional Growth Goals
Regional Framework for Local Decisions
Multi-County Planning Policies

King County Planning Policies
Countywide Goals/Policies
Countywide Growth Management

Seattle Comprehensive Plan
Citywide Goals/Policies
Neighborhood Goals/Policies
Six-Year Capital Investment Plan

Implementation Tools
Examples of Implementing
Plans

Examples of Codes & Rules in
Seattle Municipal Code

•
•
•
•
•
•

•
•
•

•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Pedestrian Master Plan
Bicycle Master Plan
Transit Master Plan
Freight Master Plan
Move Seattle Action Plan
Consolidated Plan for
Housing and Community
Development
Parks Legacy Plan
SPU Stormwater
Management Plan
SPU Solid Waste Plan
City Light Strategic Plan
My Library Strategic Plan
Climate Action Plan
Disaster Recovery
Framework



•
•
•
•

Land Use Code
Stormwater Code
Environmentally Critical
Areas (ECA) Code
Historic Preservation
Environmental Protection
Street and Sidewalk Use
Parks and Recreation

Examples of Programs &
Initiatives
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Move Seattle Levy
Housing Levy
Seattle Park District
Seattle Homeowner
Stabilization Program
Multifamily Property Tax
Exemption (MFTE) Credit
Program
Neighborhood Matching
Fund
City Light Appliance
Rebate Program
Public Art Program
Green Stormwater
Infrastructure Program
Fire and Emergency
Response Levy
Food Action Plan



20

Growth Strategy

Introduction
Seattle’s strategy for accommodating future growth and creating a sustainable and equitable city builds on the foundation of its many diverse neighborhoods and aims to create a
better city by providing
•
•
•
•
•
•

a variety of housing options,
locations for employment growth,
walkable communities with good transit access,
services and the infrastructure needed to support growth,
respect for the natural environment and enhancements to the city’s cultural resources,
and
growth that enables all residents to participate fully in the city’s economy and civic life.





21

This Plan envisions a city where growth builds stronger communities, heightens our
stewardship of the environment, leads to enhanced economic opportunity and security
for all residents, and is accompanied by greater race and social equity across Seattle’s
communities.
This element of the Plan describes how the City goes about planning for growth and how
it involves others in that planning. It also describes the City’s urban village strategy—the
idea that most of Seattle’s growth should occur in the urban centers, urban villages, and
manufacturing/industrial centers. This element also presents policies about urban design
that describe how decisions about the location of growth should interact with the natural
and built environments.
Other elements of this Plan describe mechanisms the City will use to achieve the growth
vision. For example, the Land Use element describes how zoning and development regulations will control the location and sizes of new buildings in ways that help carry out the urban village strategy, the Transportation element describes the systems the City will provide
to enable people and goods to move around the city, and the Housing element includes
policies that will guide the types of housing the City will aim for and the tools the City will
use to make it possible for people who work in the city to live here as well.
Between 2000 and 2010, the population
of people of color grew more quickly
than the total population in Seattle as a
whole and within most urban villages.
However, in some urban villages the
pattern has been different. For example,
the historically African-American and
Asian-American communities at 23rd
and Union/Jackson, North Beacon Hill,
and Columbia City saw substantial decreases in their populations of color.

Changes in Population 2000 to 2010
Change in
Total Pop.

Change
in Pop. of
Color

% Change
in Total
Pop.

% Change
in Pop. of
Color

Seattle total

45,286

24,240

8.0%

13.4%

Inside urban
villages

30,544

15,883

17.1%

22.9%

Outside urban
villages

14,742

8,357

3.8%

7.5%

Urban Village Strategy
Discussion

The urban village strategy is Seattle’s growth strategy. This strategy concentrates most of
the city’s expected future growth in urban centers and urban villages. Most of these areas
have been the commercial centers serving their local communities or even the larger city
and region for decades. They are the places best equipped to absorb more housing and
businesses and to provide the services that new residents and employees will need.





22

Urban centers and villages are almost like small cities within Seattle. They are complete and
compact neighborhoods. Increasing residential and employment opportunities in urban
centers and villages makes transit and other public services convenient for more people.
It also makes providing these key services more efficient. This can be a benefit to transit–
dependent populations and to those who rely on other community services. At the same
time, locating more residents, jobs, stores, and services near each other will reduce people’s
reliance on cars, limit traffic congestion, and decrease greenhouse gas emissions.
The urban village strategy takes the unique character of the city’s neighborhoods into account when planning for future growth. The places selected for absorbing the most growth
come in various shapes and sizes, and they will serve somewhat different purposes. The
following descriptions define the roles that four different types of areas will play in the city’s
future:
Urban centers are the densest Seattle neighborhoods. They act as both regional

centers and local neighborhoods that offer a diverse mix of uses, housing, and employment opportunities.
Hub urban villages are communities that offer a balance of housing and employment
but are generally less dense than urban centers. These areas provide a mix of goods,
services, and employment for their residents and surrounding neighborhoods.
Residential urban villages are areas of residential development, generally at lower

densities than urban centers or hub urban villages. While they are also sources of
goods and services for residents and surrounding communities, for the most part they
do not offer many employment opportunities.
Manufacturing/industrial centers are home to the city’s thriving industrial businesses.

Like urban centers, they are important regional resources for retaining and attracting
jobs and for maintaining a diversified economy.
The City intends for each of these areas to see more growth and change over time than
other commercial locations or primarily residential areas, and together they will accommodate the majority of the city’s expansion during this Plan’s life span. The City will continue
to work with its residents, businesses, and institutions citywide to promote conditions that
will help each of its communities thrive, but it will pay special attention to the urban centers
and villages where the majority of the new housing and jobs is expected. The policies in this
Plan provide direction for that change and growth.
Because the City expects to concentrate public facilities, services, and transit in urban centers and urban villages, it must ensure that there are opportunities for all households to find
housing and employment in those places, regardless of income level, family size, or race.





23

In addition to designating urban centers and villages and defining the desired conditions
in these locations, the Plan addresses conditions in other areas, including large areas of
single-family development, smaller areas of multifamily and commercial uses, and a few
small industrial areas. These areas will also experience some growth, although generally in
less dense patterns than the urban villages because these areas tend to lack some of the
infrastructure needed for more dense development and some of these areas are not within
easy walking distance of services.
GOAL
GS G1

Keep Seattle as a city of unique, vibrant, and livable urban neighborhoods, with
concentrations of development where all residents can have access to employment,
transit, and retail services that can meet their daily needs.

POLICIES
GS 1.1

Designate places as urban centers, urban villages, or manufacturing/industrial
centers based on the functions they can perform and the densities they can support.

GS 1.2

Encourage investments and activities in urban centers and urban villages that will
enable those areas to flourish as compact mixed-use neighborhoods designed to
accommodate the majority of the city’s new jobs and housing.

GS 1.3

Establish boundaries for urban centers, urban villages, and manufacturing/
industrial centers that reflect existing development patterns; potential access to
services, including transit; intended community characteristics; and recognized
neighborhood areas.

GS 1.4

Coordinate planning for transportation, utilities, parks and recreation, libraries, and
other public services to meet the anticipated growth and increased density in urban
centers and villages.

GS 1.5

Encourage infill development in underused sites, particularly in urban centers and
villages.

GS 1.6

Plan for development in urban centers and urban villages in ways that will provide
all Seattle households, particularly marginalized populations, with better access to
services, transit, and educational and employment opportunities.

GS 1.7

Promote levels of density, mixed-uses, and transit improvements in urban centers
and villages that will support walking, biking, and use of public transportation.

GS 1.8

Use zoning and other planning tools to shape the amount and pace of growth
in ways that will limit displacement of marginalized populations, and that will
accommodate and preserve community services, and culturally relevant institutions
and businesses.

GS 1.9

Distribute public investments to address current inequities, recognizing the need to
also serve growing communities.





24

GS 1.10

Establish urban centers and urban villages using the guidelines described in Growth
Strategy Figure 1.

Growth Strategy Figure 1
Urban Center and Urban Village Guidelines
Characteristic

Land Area

Access

Urban Centers*

Hub Urban Villages

Residential Urban Villages

Up to 1.5 square miles
(960 acres)

At least 20 contiguous acres
of land currently zoned to
accommodate commercial or
mixed-use activities

At least 10 acres of
commercial zoning within a
radius of 2,000 feet

Within 0.5 miles of the
existing or planned highcapacity transit station

Transit service with a
frequency of 15 minutes or
less during peak hours and
30 minutes or less during offpeak hours, with direct access
to at least one urban center

Transit service with a
frequency of 15 minutes or
less during peak hours and
30 minutes or less during offpeak hours, with direct access
to at least one urban center

Connected to neighboring
areas and nearby public
amenities by existing or
planned bicycle lanes and/or
sidewalks

Connected to neighboring
areas and nearby public
amenities by existing or
planned bicycle lanes
and/or sidewalks

Zoning that allows for a
diverse mix of commercial
and residential activities

Zoning that allows a range
of uses, including a variety
of housing types as well as
commercial and retail services
serving a local, citywide, or
regional market, generally at
a lower scale than in urban
centers

Zoning that emphasizes
residential uses while allowing
for commercial and retail
services for the village and
surrounding area, generally
at a lower scale than in hub
urban villages

Zoning that permits

Zoning that permits at least

Zoning that permits at least 12
dwelling units per gross acre

Existing or planned
connections to surrounding
neighborhoods by bicycle
lanes and/or sidewalks

Zoning and Use

•

Growth
Accommodation

•

•

a minimum of 15,000
jobs within 0.5 miles of
a high-capacity transit
station
an overall employment
density of 50 jobs per
acre, and
an overall residential
density of 15
households per acre

•
•
•
•

15 dwelling units per
gross acre
25 jobs per gross acre
2,500 total jobs, and
3,500 dwelling units

*The urban center description was taken from King County Countywide Planning Policies.





25

GS 1.11

Permit various sizes of urban villages based on local conditions, but limit sizes so
that most places in the village are within walking distance from employment and
service areas in the village.

GS 1.12

Include the area that is generally within a ten-minute walk of light rail stations
or very good bus service in urban village boundaries, except in manufacturing/
industrial centers.

GS 1.13

Provide opportunities for marginalized populations to live and work in urban
centers and urban villages throughout the city by allowing a variety of housing types
and affordable rent levels in these places.

GS 1.14

Support convenient access to healthful and culturally relevant food for all areas where
people live by encouraging grocery stores, farmers’ markets, and community food gardens.

GS 1.15

Designate areas as manufacturing/industrial centers consistent with the following
characteristics and with the Countywide Planning Policies:
•

Existing zoning that promotes manufacturing, warehousing, and distribution uses

•

Zoning that discourages uses that pose short- or long-term conflicts with
industrial uses, or that threaten to convert significant amounts of industrial
land to nonindustrial uses

•

Zoning that strictly limits residential uses and discourages land uses that are
not compatible with industrial uses

•

Buffers that protect neighboring, less intensive land uses from the impacts
associated with industrial activity (provided by generally maintaining existing
buffers, including existing industrial buffer zones)

•

Sufficient zoning capacity to accommodate a minimum of ten thousand jobs

•

Relatively flat terrain allowing for efficient industrial processes

•

Reasonable access to the regional highway, rail, air, and/or waterway systems
for transportation of goods

GS 1.16

Use zoning and other tools to maintain and expand existing industrial activities
within the manufacturing/industrial centers.

GS 1.17

Limit City-owned land in the manufacturing/industrial centers to uses that are
compatible with other industrial uses and that are inappropriate in other zones, and
discourage other public entities from siting nonindustrial uses in manufacturing/
industrial centers.

GS 1.18

Promote the use of industrial land for industrial purposes.

GS 1.19

Encourage economic activity and development in Seattle’s industrial areas by
supporting the retention and expansion of existing industrial businesses and by
providing opportunities for the creation of new businesses consistent with the
character of industrial areas.

GS 1.20

Strive to retain and expand existing manufacturing and industrial activity.





26

GS 1.21

Maintain land that is uniquely accessible to water, rail, and regional highways for
continued industrial use.

Areas Outside Centers and Villages
GS 1.22

Support healthy neighborhoods throughout the city so that all residents have
access to a range of housing choices, as well as access to parks, open space, and
services.

GS 1.23

Allow limited multifamily, commercial, and industrial uses outside of urban villages
to support the surrounding area or to maintain the existing character.

GS 1.24

Plan for uses and densities on hospital and college campuses that are located
outside urban centers and villages in ways that recognize the important
contributions of these institutions and the generally low-scale development of their
surroundings.

Distribution of Growth
Discussion

The City does not completely control where growth will take place. The City adopts zoning
that allows certain types of development in particular locations, and the City can make
certain places attractive to development by making investments or offering incentives in
those places. However, most new development is the result of decisions made by private
landowners or developers who choose where they want to build.
Guided by the urban village strategy, the City has adopted zoning that will lead the bulk of
Seattle’s future growth to take place in areas designated as urban centers and urban villages.
The City’s vision is that job growth will be concentrated in urban centers—areas that already
function as high-density, concentrated employment cores with the most access to the
regional transit network. The City will especially focus growth in urban centers and those
urban villages that are within easy walking distance of frequent and reliable transit service.
Currently, jobs and households are unevenly distributed across Seattle. For instance, the
four adjoining urban centers (Downtown, First Hill/Capitol Hill, South Lake Union, and
Uptown) contain almost a fifth of the City’s households and nearly half of the city’s jobs—on
less than 5 percent of the city’s land. Downtown alone has about ten times more jobs than
housing units. Future growth estimates show that these urban centers will likely continue to
be major job centers.
Industrial job growth will continue to take place mostly within the City’s two existing and
well-established manufacturing/industrial centers. There will also be overall job growth in





27

hub urban villages distributed throughout the city, which will put jobs and services closer to
the surrounding residential population.
Urban villages that contain very good transit service are expected to grow more than those
without that service. Very good transit means either a light rail station or a RapidRide stop
plus at least one other frequent bus route. In May 2015, the City published a Growth and
Equity Analysis to analyze impacts on displacement and opportunity related to Seattle’s
growth strategy. That analysis found that some urban villages that have light rail stations
also are at high risk of too much development displacing existing households or small businesses. The City wants these areas to benefit from growth and investment, but we also need
to pay attention to how growth can increase the risk of displacing marginalized populations
and small businesses. To mitigate the risk, the Plan assigns a growth rate to these urban
villages that is the same as for the residential villages that do not meet the definition for
very good transit service. As the City monitors urban village growth in the future, the smaller
growth rates for these two urban villages will help us examine the potential for displacement. Growth Strategy Figure 4 shows the different categories of urban villages, along with
their level of transit service.
More modest growth will occur in various places outside centers and villages, including
along arterials where current zoning allows multifamily and commercial uses.
This Plan anticipates that over the next twenty years, Seattle will add 70,000 housing units
and 115,000 jobs. These estimates represent the city’s share of King County’s projected
twenty-year growth. Seattle’s comprehensive planning to accommodate this expected
growth works from the assumption that the estimates for growth citywide, in urban villages
and in urban centers are the minimums we should plan for. The city will monitor various
aspects of growth over time and respond with adjusted approaches if growth significantly
exceeds the estimates.
GOAL
GS G2

Accommodate a majority of the city’s expected household growth in urban centers
and urban villages and a majority of employment growth in urban centers. (Figure
2 shows the estimated amount of growth for each urban center, and Figure 3 shows
the estimated growth rate for different categories of urban villages.)





28

Growth Strategy Figure 2
Estimated Urban Center Growth 2015–2035
Housing Units

Jobs

Downtown

12,000

35,000

First Hill/Capitol Hill

6,000

3,000

University District

3,500

5,000

Northgate

3,000

6,000

South Lake Union

7,500

15,000

Uptown

3,000

2,500

Duwamish

0

6,000

Ballard/Interbay

0

3,000

Expected Housing
Growth Rate*

Expected Job
Growth Rate*

60%

50%

40%

50%

40%

50%

Urban Centers

Manufacturing/Industrial Centers

Growth Strategy Figure 3
Estimated Urban Village Growth Rates

Hub Urban Villages
With very good transit service**
•
•

Ballard
West Seattle Junction

With high displacement risk, regardless of the level of
transit service
•
•

Bitter Lake Village
Mt. Baker (North Rainier)

Other Hub Urban Villages
•
•

Fremont
Lake City





29

Expected Housing
Growth Rate*

Expected Job
Growth Rate*

50%

N/A

30%

N/A

30%

N/A

Residential Urban Villages
With very good transit service**
•
•

Crown Hill
Roosevelt

With high displacement risk, regardless of the level of
transit service
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

23rd & Union-Jackson
Columbia City
North Beacon Hill
Othello
Rainier Beach
South Park
Westwood-Highland Park

Other Residential Urban Villages
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Admiral
Aurora/Licton Springs
Eastlake
Green Lake
Greenwood-Phinney Ridge
Madison-Miller
Morgan Junction
Upper Queen Anne
Wallingford

*Percentage growth above the actual number of housing units or jobs in 2015, except in urban villages
where actual zoning capacity constrains percentage growth to less than shown in the table. No job growth
rate is assigned to residential villages.
**Very good transit service means either a light rail station or a RapidRide bus service plus at least one
other frequent bus route.

POLICIES
GS 2.1

Plan for a variety of uses and the highest densities of both housing and employment
in Seattle’s urban centers, consistent with their role in the regional growth strategy.

GS 2.2

Base twenty-year growth estimates for each urban center and manufacturing/
industrial center on the following criteria:
•

Citywide targets for housing and job growth adopted in the Countywide
Planning Policies

•

The role of the center in regional growth management planning

•

The most recently adopted subarea plan for the center





30

Growth Strategy Figure 4
Urban Centers, Urban Villages, Manufacturing/Industrial Centers


31

•

Level of transit service

•

Existing zoning capacity for additional commercial and residential
development

•

Existing densities

•

Current development conditions, recent development trends, and plans for
private or public development, such as by major institutions

•

Plans for infrastructure, public amenities, and services that could attract or
support additional growth

•

Access to employment for, and potential displacement of, marginalized
populations

GS 2.3

Accommodate a substantial portion of the city’s growth in hub and residential
urban villages.

GS 2.4

Work toward a distribution of growth that eliminates racial and social disparities by
growing great neighborhoods throughout the city, with equitable access for all and
with community stability that reduces the potential for displacement.

GS 2.5

Adjust urban center growth estimates periodically to reflect the most current policy
guidance in regional and countywide growth management plans, or reexamine
estimates as plans for the city’s urban centers are substantially amended.

GS 2.6

Work with communities where growth is slower than anticipated to identify barriers
to growth and strategies to overcome those barriers.

Urban Design
Discussion

As Seattle evolves, thoughtful urban design can help both conserve and enhance the
aspects of its physical environment that make it so appealing to residents and visitors
alike. These aspects include well-defined and diverse mixed-use neighborhoods; compact,
walkable scale; proximity to nature; and attractive parks, streets, and public spaces. In a
flourishing city, urban design can help seamlessly integrate the new with the old, producing
positive results while limiting the negative impacts of change. The policies in this element
concern broad choices the City might make about where and how to develop.
For example, several Seattle neighborhoods are designated as historic districts in an
effort to preserve their distinctive characters. The way the City builds and maintains major
infrastructure, including parks and roads, will continue to define key public spaces and the
connections between them.





32

The urban design policies described here outline the City’s approaches to regulating,
building, and maintaining the city, while reflecting its diverse neighborhoods, populations,
and natural features. The policies here are separated into three specific areas of focus:
Natural Environment, Built Environment, and Public Spaces. More detailed direction for
individual projects can be found in the Land Use Code’s regulations and in the City’s design
guidelines.
The policies in this element are not intended to be used for reviewing individual projects.
Rather, the City helps shape projects through zoning regulations and the design review
program.
GOAL
GS G3

Maintain and enhance Seattle’s unique character and sense of place, including its
natural setting, history, human-scaled development, and community identity, as
the city grows and changes.

Natural Environment

POLICIES
GS 3.1

Encourage the preservation, protection, and restoration of Seattle’s distinctive
natural features and landforms such as bluffs, beaches, streams, and remaining
evergreen forests.

GS 3.2

Design public facilities to emphasize physical and visual connections to Seattle’s
natural surroundings, with special attention to public vistas of shorelines, the
Olympic Mountains, and the Cascade Range.

GS 3.3

Encourage design that recognizes natural systems and integrates ecological
functions such as stormwater filtration or retention with other infrastructure and
development projects.

GS 3.4

Respect topography, water, and natural systems when siting tall buildings.

GS 3.5

Provide both physical and visual public access to streams, lakes, and Puget Sound.

GS 3.6

Extend sustainable landscaping and an urban design approach to typically
underdesigned sites such as surface parking lots, rooftops, and freeway edges.

GS 3.7

Promote the use of native plants for landscaping to emphasize the region’s natural
identity and foster environmental health.





33

Built Environment
GS 3.8

Encourage the preservation and expansion of the tree canopy throughout the city
for the aesthetic, health and environmental benefits trees provide, considering first
the residential and mixed-use areas with the least tree canopy in order to more
equitably distribute the benefits to residents.

GS 3.9

Preserve characteristics that contribute to communities’ general identity, such as
block and lot patterns and areas of historic, architectural, or social significance.

GS 3.10

Design public infrastructure and private building developments to help visitors
understand the existing block and street patterns and to reinforce the walkability of
neighborhoods.

GS 3.11

Use zoning tools and natural features to ease the transitions from the building
intensities of urban villages and commercial arterials to lower-density
developments of surrounding areas.

GS 3.12

Design streets with distinctive identities that are compatible with a citywide system
that defines differences between types of streets and that allows for different design
treatments to reflect a particular street’s function, right-of-way width, and adjoining uses.

GS 3.13

Preserve, strengthen, and, as opportunities permit, reconnect Seattle’s street
grid as a means to knit together neighborhoods and to connect areas of the city.
Support efforts to use lids and other connections over highways that separate
neighborhoods, especially when such lids provide opportunities to reconnect
neighborhoods and provide amenities such as affordable housing, open spaces, or
pedestrian and bike connections to transit stations.

GS 3.14

Design urban villages to be walkable, using approaches such as clear street grids,
pedestrian connections between major activity centers, incorporation of public open
spaces, and commercial buildings with retail and active uses that flank the sidewalk.

GS 3.15

Design multifamily zones to be appealing residential communities with high-quality
housing and development standards that promote privacy and livability, such as
appropriately scaled landscaping, street amenities, and, in appropriate locations,
limited commercial uses targeted for the local population.

GS 3.16

Encourage designs for buildings and public spaces that maximize use of natural
light and provide protection from inclement weather.

GS 3.17

Encourage the use of land, rooftops, and other spaces to contribute to urban food
production.

GS 3.18

Use varied building forms and heights to enhance attractive and walkable neighborhoods.

GS 3.19

Use groupings of tall buildings, instead of lone towers, to enhance overall
topography or to define districts.

GS 3.20 Consider taller building heights in key locations to provide visual focus and define
activity centers, such as near light rail stations in urban centers and urban villages.





34

GS 3.21

Limit the negative impacts of tall buildings on public views and on sunlight in public
streets and parks by defining upper-level building setbacks and lot coverage or by
using other techniques.

GS 3.22 Locate tall buildings to respect natural surroundings and key natural features and
to minimize obstructing views of these features, such as by having lower building
heights near lakes or Puget Sound.
GS 3.23 Encourage street widths and building heights that are in proportion with each other
by reducing setbacks from the street and keeping reasonable sidewalk widths for
lower buildings.

Public Spaces
GS 3.24

Encourage innovative street design that expands the role of streets as public spaces
and that could include use for markets, festivals, or street parks.

GS 3.25 Promote well-defined outdoor spaces that can easily accommodate potential users
and that are well integrated with adjoining buildings and spaces.
GS 3.26 Design public spaces that consider the nearby physical context and the needs of the
community.
GS 3.27 Use the principles of crime prevention through environmental design for public
spaces, where appropriate.

Annexation
Discussion

Small areas of unincorporated land lie immediately south of the Seattle city limits. The
King County government currently administers services to these areas. However, the state’s
Growth Management Act (GMA) anticipates that all areas within the county’s urban growth
boundary will eventually be part of a city. Figure 5 shows the locations Seattle has identified as potential annexation areas.
GOAL
GS G4

Eliminate pockets of unincorporated land abutting Seattle.





35

POLICIES
GS 4.1

Cooperate with adjacent jurisdictions in order to reach equitable and balanced
resolutions about jurisdictional boundaries for the remaining unincorporated areas
abutting city limits.

GS 4.2

Designate unincorporated land for potential annexation where the area has access,
or can easily be connected, to City services, and the boundary-change agreements
will result in an equitable distribution of revenues and costs, including asset transfer
and the development, maintenance, and operation of facilities.

GS 4.3

Consider annexation requests by the residents of unincorporated areas as a way for
the City to meet regional growth management goals.

GS 4.4

Support annexations of unincorporated areas to surrounding jurisdictions by taking
part in public engagement efforts to determine local sentiment and in developing
interlocal agreements related to annexations.





36

Growth Strategy Figure 5

Potential Annexation Areas


37

Land Use

Introduction
Land use choices affect how Seattle looks and feels to visitors and how it functions for those
who call it home. This Plan’s land use policies follow the urban village strategy. They help
guide new housing and businesses to the urban centers and villages and help design the
actual buildings and public spaces. The land use policies also recognize the character of the
city’s different neighborhoods, part of what makes Seattle such an attractive place to live.
Seattle is a “built city.” That means we don’t have a lot of vacant land where we can put
new buildings. It also means that the land use goals and policies need to fit more jobs and
housing into our existing communities. To help everyone to share in the benefits of growth,
the land use policies steer most new development toward the urban centers and urban
villages that are accessible by public transit and that have the goods, services, and amenities that people want. And while growth and change bring good things to the city, we don’t





38

want the Seattle of the future to leave anyone behind. As we grow, we need to provide more
housing and other services for the most vulnerable among us.
You see these policies in action when you notice a difference in the location, type, and size
of new buildings. Guided by the urban village strategy, the City’s Land Use Code (Seattle
Municipal Code Title 23) includes a map showing the zones that define the types of buildings allowed. Detailed regulations tell developers what the buildings in each zone can look
like. The zones themselves are grouped in the Land Use Code under general categories such
as single-family zones, which are composed mostly of houses, and commercial/mixed-use
zones, which include businesses as well as housing. Multifamily zones include apartment
buildings, town houses, and condos, while industrial zones create space for the port and
manufacturing to thrive. Downtown has its own zone type for dense, highrise office and
residential buildings.

In Seattle, as in other cities, household
incomes and the housing options that
people can afford tend to vary by race
and ethnicity. Roughly half of Seattle’s
households live in single-unit housing. Householders of color are more
likely to reside in multifamily housing
even though they have more people
per household on average. The same is
true for households with a foreign-born
householder.

Type of Housing
By Characteristics of Seattle Householders
50%

47%

50%

53%

60%

40%

Multifamily
or other

59%

1-unit
(detached or
attached)

41%

Total
White,
Householders Foreign-born
householders non-Hispanic
of color
householders
householders

Source: 2011–2013 American Community Survey (ACS), US Census Bureau

This Land Use element is divided into three sections. The first section has policies that
affect the city as a whole. These policies speak to how Seattle should change and grow in
the years to come. The Future Land Use Map shows us the shape of this next-generation
Seattle. The second section talks about each kind of land use area: single-family, multifamily, commercial/mixed-use, industrial, and Downtown. The policies in this section explain
what makes each of these land use areas different. The third section contains policies for
places that play special roles—for example, historic districts.
The Land Use Appendix provides information about the amount of land being used for
different purposes across the city. It also displays the density of housing, population, and
jobs throughout the city.





39

Citywide Land Use Policies
Citywide land use policies guide the content and interpretation of the City’s Land Use Code,
which contains detailed regulations about where and how activities on the land may be
changed. These regulations are applied geographically by zone. Unless a difference is noted, policies in this section apply across all zones.

The Future Land Use Map and Locations of Zones
Discussion

The Future Land Use Map shows distinct land use designations or types that are located
around the city. The City has decided the right uses for each area and how much use each
area should receive. Five of these area types—single-family residential areas, multifamily
residential areas, commercial/mixed-use areas, Downtown areas, and industrial areas—are
meant to suggest specific uses. One area might be good for building more homes or right
for building shops and restaurants. Within each land use area, there may be different levels
of zoning that provide more detail about what can be built. This ensures that the right types
and density of buildings will be built in each place. In certain places, special zoning can be
created through a separate process. Some of these special zones are created around large
hospitals or universities or housing developments where the needs of many people need
to be coordinated. These include major institution overlay districts and master planned
communities. Four other types of areas on the Future Land Use Map show the urban village
strategy in use. Urban centers, hub urban villages, residential urban villages, and manufacturing/industrial centers work together with the land use area designations. They show
us the best spots to place new housing and jobs and the right places for manufacturing,
warehousing, and port activity.
As the city’s needs and priorities shift, the Future Land Use Map may be changed or formally amended. Some changes, such as adjusting boundaries or moving around specific
zones within the same general land use area or urban village, can be made without a formal
amendment or change to the map.
Actual zones that are used to regulate new buildings are identified on the City’s Official
Land Use Map. This map is part of the Plan’s regulatory structure and can be found in the
Land Use Code. Sometimes landowners want to change the type or size of the buildings
they can build on their land. Changing the zoning of a particular area or site is a formal
process that requires City Council approval. When a landowner applies for a rezone, the City
looks to see if the change matches up with the Future Land Use Map, follows the Land Use
Code, and fits with the surrounding area and the neighborhood.





40

Future Land Use Map


It is not intended to provide the sole basis for rezones
and other legislative and quasi-judicial decisions, for which
the decision makers must look to the Comprehensive Plan
policies and various implementing regulations.





41

GOAL
LU G1

Achieve a development pattern consistent with the urban village strategy,
concentrating most new housing and employment in urban centers and villages,
while also allowing some infill development compatible with the established
context in areas outside centers and villages.

POLICIES
LU 1.1

Use the Future Land Use Map to identify where different types of development may
occur in support of the urban village strategy.

LU 1.2

Promote this plan’s overall desired land use pattern through appropriate zoning that
regulates the mix of uses as well as the size and density of development to focus
new residential and commercial development in urban centers and urban villages,
and integrate new projects outside of centers and villages into the established
development context.

LU 1.3

Provide for a wide range in the scale and density permitted for multifamily
residential, commercial, and mixed-use projects to generally achieve the following
overall density and scale characteristics, consistent, at a minimum, with the
guidelines in Growth Strategy Figure 1:
•

In urban centers, a moderate to high-density and scale of development

•

In hub urban villages, a moderate density and scale of development

•

In residential urban villages, a low to moderate density and scale of
development

•

Consider higher densities and scales of development in areas near light rail
stations

LU 1.4

Provide a gradual transition in building height and scale inside urban centers and
urban villages where they border lower-scale residential areas.

LU 1.5

Require Future Land Use Map amendments only when needed to achieve a
significant change to the intended function of a large area.

LU 1.6

Consider and seek to reduce the potential health impacts of air pollution on
residential populations and other sensitive uses near corridors with high volumes
of vehicle traffic, the King County Airport, major rail yards, freight routes, and point
sources of pollution.





42

Uses
Discussion

The City regulates or controls how Seattle land is used through zoning. Each zone comes
with a specific set of rules defining what types of uses are allowed in that area. Regulating
how we use land in Seattle is important for many reasons. It allows us to plan for new people and businesses that come into the city and to look into the future. It allows goods and
services to be located where they are needed most and helps us put jobs and housing in the
places that match our vision. Regulations can also help smooth transitions between zones.
Zoning helps Seattle remain a city of diverse neighborhoods, each with its own character
and special features. Regulating how we use our land also helps us meet the common
needs of all Seattleites for jobs, housing, services, and access to amenities and cultural
resources.
GOAL
LU G2

Provide zoning and accompanying land use regulations that
•

allow a variety of housing types to accommodate housing choices for
households of all types and income levels;

•

support a wide diversity of employment-generating activities to provide
jobs for a diverse residential population, as well as a variety of services for
residents and businesses; and

•

accommodate the full range of public services, institutions, and amenities
needed to support a racially and economically diverse, sustainable urban
community.

POLICIES
LU 2.1

Allow or prohibit uses in each zone based on the zone’s intended function as
described in this Land Use element and on the expected impacts of a use on other
properties in the zone and the surrounding area. Generally allow a broad mix of
compatible uses in the urban centers and urban villages.

LU 2.2

Include provisions to potentially allow as conditional uses those activities that may
be beneficial to an area but that also require additional measures to avoid potential
impacts those activities could have on sensitive environments or on other permitted
uses.

LU 2.3

Allow residential use outright or as a conditional use in all zones except industrial
zones and those shoreline areas where residential uses may conflict with the
intended function of the shoreline environment.





43

LU 2.4

Limit nonresidential uses in residential zones to those necessary or highly
compatible with the function of residential neighborhoods.

LU 2.5

Allow nonconforming uses to be maintained and enhanced, but generally not to be
expanded or extended, and encourage them to become more conforming over time.

LU 2.6

Avoid introducing incompatible land uses adjacent to or within the Airport Influence
Area of commercial service airports.

LU 2.7

Review future legislative rezones to determine if they pose a risk of increasing
the displacement of residents, especially marginalized populations, and the
businesses and institutions that serve them.

LU 2.8

Evaluate new land use regulations to determine if there are potential adverse
outcomes that may affect marginalized populations or other groups or individuals
unfairly, and seek to avoid or mitigate such potential outcomes.

Special Uses: Public Facilities and Small Institutions
Discussion

Throughout Seattle our communities are dotted with facilities that provide needed services
to local residents. These include schools, fire and police stations, and other buildings that
serve special functions that require them to be different from other buildings in the same
zone. For instance, fire stations may need extra room for trucks, and schools need to be
much larger than the single-family houses around them. Similar issues sometimes arise
with facilities and small institutions not operated by the public sector, such as churches,
private schools, and nursing homes.
GOAL
LU G3

Allow public facilities and small institutions to locate where they are generally
compatible with the function, character, and scale of an area, even if some deviation
from certain regulations is necessary.

POLICIES
LU 3.1

Regulate public facilities and small institutions to promote compatibility with other
developments in the area.

LU 3.2

Allow public facilities and small institutions to depart from development standards,
if necessary to meet their particular functional requirements, while maintaining
general design compatibility with the surrounding area’s scale and character.
Require public facilities and small institutions to adhere to zoned height limits,





44

except for spires on religious institutions. Consider providing greater flexibility for
schools in recognition of their important role in the community.
LU 3.3

Allow standards to be modified for required off-street parking associated with public
facilities and small institutions based on the expected use and characteristics of the
facility and the likely impacts on surrounding parking and development conditions,
and on existing and planned transportation facilities in the area.

LU 3.4

Avoid clusters of public facilities and small institutions in residential areas if
such concentrations would create or further aggravate parking shortages, traffic
congestion, and noise in the area.

LU 3.5

Allow nonconforming public facilities and small institutions to expand or make
structural changes, provided these alterations comply with the zone’s development
standards and do not increase the structure’s nonconformity.

LU 3.6

Allow buildings no longer used as schools to be put to other uses not otherwise
permitted in the applicable zone. Base decisions about these uses on criteria that
are established for each vacant school as the need arises, through a process that
includes Seattle Public Schools, the City, and the surrounding neighborhood.

Special Uses: Telecommunication Facilities
Discussion

Cell phone service providers and broadcast radio and television stations require equipment
that can transmit their signals. This equipment usually must be up high enough that signals
can get through. They are also regulated by federal law. AM and FM radio and VHF and
UHF television transmission towers are considered major communication utilities. Minor
communication facilities are generally smaller and include such things as personal wireless
service and cellular communication facilities.
GOAL
LU G4

Provide opportunities for locating radio and television broadcast utilities (major
communications utilities) to support continued and improved service to the public
and to address potential impacts to public health.

POLICIES
LU 4.1

Allow major communications utilities only where impacts of their size and
appearance can be offset, and in a way that does not lead to an overall increase in
TV and radio towers.

LU 4.2

Encourage replacing existing antennas with new antennas to achieve lower levels of
radio-frequency radiation at ground level.





45

LU 4.3

Prohibit new major communication utilities, such as radio and television
transmission towers, in neighborhood and multifamily residential zones and in
pedestrian-oriented commercial/mixed-use zones, and encourage existing major
communication utilities to relocate to nonresidential areas.

LU 4.4

Require major communication utilities to be developed in ways that limit impacts
on nearby areas, including through development standards and design treatments
that minimize visual impacts on neighboring properties and provide an overall
appearance that is as compatible as possible with the uses permitted in the zone
and the desired character of the area.

LU 4.5

Limit the intrusiveness minor communication utilities could impose on communities
by encouraging collocation of facilities and by requiring mitigation of visual and
noise impacts.

General Development Standards
Discussion

Development standards are the rules that define what type of structure can be built on a
property. Standards often include limits on building height, setbacks from the sidewalk,
how much of the lot can be covered by structures, or the characteristics of the front facade
of the building. Development standards help shape the look and feel of Seattle’s neighborhoods as they grow. They help new buildings fit in with the character of a neighborhood or
may reflect the future vision for a certain area. The standards also help builders care for the
environment and take into account the physical limits of certain areas.
GOAL
LU G5

Establish development standards that guide building design to serve each zone’s
function and produce the scale and character desired, while addressing public
health, safety, and welfare.

POLICIES
LU 5.1

Allow for flexibility in development standards so existing structures can be
maintained and improved, and new development can better respond to site-specific
conditions.

LU 5.2

Develop and apply appropriate development standards that provide predictability
regarding the allowed intensity of development and expected development types
for each zone.





46

LU 5.3

Control the massing of structures to make them compatible with the area’s planned
scale, provide a reasonable ratio of open to occupied space on a site, and allow the
building to receive adequate natural light.

LU 5.4

Use maximum height limits to maintain the desired scale relationship between
new structures, existing development, and the street environment; address varied
topographic conditions; and limit public view blockage. In certain Downtown zones
and in industrial zones, heights for certain types of development uniquely suited to
those zones may be unlimited.

LU 5.5

Provide for residents’ recreational needs on development sites by establishing
standards for private or shared amenity areas such as rooftop decks, balconies,
ground-level open spaces, or enclosed spaces.

LU 5.6

Establish setbacks in residential areas as needed to allow for adequate light, air,
and ground-level open space; help provide privacy; promote compatibility with the
existing development pattern; and separate residential uses from more intensive
uses.

LU 5.7

Employ development standards in residential zones that address the use of the
ground level of new development sites to fit with existing patterns of landscaping,
especially front yards in neighborhood residential areas, and to encourage
permeable surfaces and vegetation.

LU 5.8

Establish tree and landscaping requirements that preserve and enhance the City’s
physical and aesthetic character and recognize the value of trees and landscaping
in addressing stormwater management, pollution reduction, heat island mitigation,
and other issues.

LU 5.9

Enhance the visual quality of an area through standards for screening and
landscaping appropriate to each zone in order to limit the visual impact of new
development on the surrounding neighborhood, the streetscape, and development
in areas with less intensive zoning.

LU 5.10 Regulate signage to encourage reasonable identification of businesses and to
communicate information of community interest while limiting visual clutter,
protecting the public interest, and enhancing the city’s appearance and safety.
LU 5.11

Establish maximum permitted noise levels that account for both the function of the
noise-producing area and the function of areas where the noise may be heard in
order to reduce the health hazards and nuisance factors associated with some uses.

LU 5.12

Identify uses as major noise generators based on the noise associated with certain
equipment operations or the nature of a particular activity, and regulate these uses
to reduce noise to acceptable levels.

LU 5.13

Regulate activities that generate air emissions such as dust, smoke, solvent fumes,
or odors, in order to maintain and encourage successful commercial and industrial
activities while protecting employees, clients, nearby residents, the general public,
and the natural environment from the potential impacts.

LU 5.14 Establish controls on the placement, direction, and maximum height of lighting and
on the glare from reflective materials used on the exterior of structures in order to





47

limit impacts on surrounding uses, enhance the character of the city, and encourage
energy conservation.
LU 5.15

Address view protection through
•

zoning that considers views, with special emphasis on shoreline views;

•

development standards that help to reduce impacts on views, including
height, bulk, scale, and view corridor provisions, as well as design review
guidelines; and

•

environmental policies that protect specified public views, including views of
mountains, major bodies of water, designated landmarks, and the Downtown
skyline.

LU 5.16

Require higher-density development to offset its impacts through mechanisms such
as incentives for landmark preservation, open space amenities, affordable housing
and affordable commercial space.

LU 5.17

Help preserve active farms in the region through strategies such as offering
incentives to developers who transfer development rights from regional farmland to
sites in the city.

LU 5.18

Seek excellence in new development through a design review process that
encourages multiple perspectives on design issues and that complements
development regulations, allowing for flexibility in the application of development
standards to achieve quality design that
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

enhances the character of the city;
respects the surrounding neighborhood context, including historic resources;
enhances and protects the natural environment;
allows for variety and creativity in building design and site planning;
furthers community design and development objectives;
achieves desired intensities of development; and
responds to the increasingly diverse social and cultural character of the city.

Off-Street Parking
Discussion

Parking is found on both public and private property. Since on-street parking can limit the
cars, transit, and bicycles using the same space for travel, street parking policies are covered in the Transportation element. The Land Use Code regulates off-street parking, spaces
often provided as part of private developments. Because the City encourages walking,
biking, and transit for moving around town, consistent with the urban village strategy, the
City’s zoning rules do not require parking in certain areas. In urban centers and those urban
villages with reliable transit access, the City instead allows the developers to decide how
much parking they need to serve their tenants. In other areas, like Downtown Seattle, the





48

City may set a limit on private parking to lessen traffic and encourage people to walk, bus,
or bike to the area. Where parking is required, we know that the number of spaces, their
design, and their location on the property make a big difference. Parking facilities change
the size of new developments, what they look like, and what they cost to build. The policies
in this section are meant to encourage communities where people can walk to what they
need, especially in the urban centers and villages. They also support moving away from
car-focused transportation.
GOAL
LU G6

Regulate off-street parking to address parking demand in ways that reduce
reliance on automobiles, improve public health and safety, reduce greenhouse gas
emissions, lower construction costs to reduce the cost of housing and increase
affordable housing, create attractive and walkable environments, and promote
economic development throughout the city.

POLICIES
LU 6.1

Establish parking requirements where appropriate for both single-occupant
vehicles and their alternatives at levels that further this Plan’s goal to increase the
use of public transit, car pools, walking, and bicycles as alternatives to the use of
single-occupant vehicles.

LU 6.2

Modify residential parking regulations, where parking is required, to recognize differences
in the likely auto use and ownership of intended occupants of new developments,
such as projects provided for low-income, elderly, or residents with disabilities.

LU 6.3

Rely on market forces to determine the amount of parking provided in areas of the
city that are well-served by transit, such as urban centers and urban villages.

LU 6.4

Consider setting parking maximums in urban centers and urban villages, where
high levels of pedestrian, bicycle, and transit accessibility make many trips possible
without a car.

LU 6.5

Establish bicycle parking requirements to encourage bicycle ownership and use.

LU 6.6

Limit the off-street impacts on pedestrians and surrounding areas by restricting the
number and size of automobile curb cuts, and by generally requiring alley access to
parking when there is an accessible, surfaced alley.

LU 6.7

Prohibit most street-level parking between buildings and the street in multifamily
zones and pedestrian-oriented commercial zones in order to maintain an attractive
and safe street-level environment, facilitate the movement of pedestrian and
vehicular traffic, minimize adverse impacts on nearby areas and structures, and,
where appropriate, maintain or create continuous street fronts.

LU 6.8

Allow shared off-site parking facilities for more efficient use of parking and to provide
the flexibility to develop parking on a site separate from the development site. Ensure
that such parking is compatible with the existing or desired character of the area.





49

LU 6.9

Require parking in areas with limited transit access and set the requirements to
discourage underused parking facilities, even if occasional spillover parking could
result.

LU 6.10 Allow transportation management programs in commercial and multifamily
residential areas with access to frequent transit to include measures such as
cooperative parking, shared parking, shared vehicles, restricted access, car pools,
van pools, or transit pass subsidies.
LU 6.11

Achieve greater parking efficiency by allowing fewer parking spaces per business
when several businesses share customer parking, thereby enabling customers to
park once and walk to numerous businesses.

LU 6.12 Locate off-street parking facilities to minimize impacts on the pedestrian
environment, especially in areas designated for active pedestrian use.
LU 6.13 Limit parking in City parks to discourage the use of park land for parking; where
there is a demonstrated need for parking, design parking facilities in ways that
preserve open space, green space, and trees and other mature vegetation.
LU 6.14 Prohibit principal-use parking in places where that parking would be incompatible
with the area’s intended function.
LU 6.15 Discourage the development of major stand-alone park-and-ride facilities within
Seattle. Additions to park-and-ride capacity could be considered
•

at the terminus of a major regional transit system,

•

where opportunities exist for shared parking, or

•

where alternatives to automobile use are particularly inadequate or cannot
be provided in a cost-effective manner.

Land Use Areas
Discussion

Historically, zones were created so that different types of uses could be developed only in
distinct areas of the city. One reason for this was to keep the uses in one area from affecting
the uses in another in a negative way. For example, industrial activities like manufacturing
were separated from residential areas to protect residents from harm. Over time, the city
evolved in a pattern similar to that basic idea. There are still areas in the city that have distinct uses, but over time commercial uses and residential uses began to blend more to give
people better access to shops and services. These changing patterns helped give Seattle its
unique neighborhoods. For instance, areas with commercial zoning that allows shops and
small offices have become the heart of many neighborhoods.





50

Areas that already had business cores and multifamily housing and that are zoned for more
housing and businesses have become the cores of the urban villages. Areas in the city were
developed at different times, giving them distinct characteristics that show their history. For
instance, houses might have a similar architectural style or have a similar relationship to
their surroundings.
Each of the land use areas plays a unique role in the city. Used in combination, they help
Seattle grow in ways that meet the city’s needs. They allow us to place new housing in the
areas where the most jobs and services are or will be in the future. They also allow us to
encourage housing in places that already have frequent and reliable transit service or that
will have better access as improvements and investments are made in rail or bus service.

Neighborhood Residential Areas
Single-family zones cover much of the city. While they are thought of as residential neighborhoods, they include a variety of uses beyond housing. For instance, most of the public
parkland is found in these zones, as are many of the public schools, cemeteries, and fire
stations. In most of these areas, houses are usually not very tall and typically have yards and
open space around them. That open space provides recreation opportunities for residents
and land for much of the city’s tree canopy.
Much of the land in these areas has been built to the densities the current zoning rules allow. However, some different housing types, such as accessory dwelling units or backyard
cottages, could increase the opportunity for adding new housing units in these areas. Over
time, some single-family areas could be incorporated into nearby urban villages, and there
could be a new definition of what is allowable in these zones when they are inside urban
villages.
GOAL
LU G7

Provide opportunities for detached single-family and other compatible housing
options that have low height, bulk, and scale in order to serve a broad array of
households and incomes and to maintain an intensity of development that is
appropriate for areas with limited access to services, infrastructure constraints,
fragile environmental conditions, or that are otherwise not conducive to more
intensive development.

POLICIES
LU 7.1

Designate as neighborhood residential areas those portions of the city that are
predominantly developed with single-family houses and that are large enough
to maintain a consistent residential character of low height, bulk, and scale over
several blocks.





51

LU 7.2

Use a range of neighborhood residential zones to
•

maintain the current low-height and low-bulk character of designated
neighborhood residential areas;

•

limit development in neighborhood residential areas or that have
environmental or infrastructure constraints;

•

allow different densities that reflect historical development patterns; and

•

respond to neighborhood plans calling for redevelopment or infill
development that maintains the neighborhood residential character of the
area but also allows for a greater range of housing types.

LU 7.3

Consider allowing redevelopment or infill development of neighborhood
residential areas inside urban centers and villages, where new development would
maintain the low height and bulk that characterize the single-family area, while
allowing a wider range of housing types such as detached accessory units, cottage
developments or small duplexes or triplexes.

LU 7.4

Allow detached neighborhood residential dwellings as the principal use permitted
outright in single-family residential areas.

LU 7.5

Encourage accessory dwelling units, family-sized units, and other housing types
that are attractive and affordable, and that are compatible with the development
pattern and building scale in neighborhood residential areas in order to make the
opportunity in single-family areas more accessible to a broad range of households
and incomes, including lower-income households.

LU 7.6

Limit the number and types of nonresidential uses allowed in neighborhood
residential areas and apply appropriate development standards in order to protect
those areas from the negative impacts of incompatible uses.

LU 7.7

Prohibit parking lots or other activities that are part of permitted uses in
neighboring higher-intensity zones from locating or expanding in neighborhood
residential areas.

LU 7.8

Use minimum lot size requirements to maintain the character of neighborhood
residential areas and to reflect the differences in environmental and development
conditions and densities found in various single-family areas throughout the city.

LU 7.9

Allow exceptions to minimum lot size requirements to recognize building sites
created under earlier regulations and historical platting patterns, to allow the
consolidation of very small lots into larger lots, to adjust lot lines to permit more
orderly development patterns, and to provide more housing opportunities by
creating additional buildable sites that integrate well with surrounding lots and do
not result in the demolition of existing housing.

LU 7.10

Reflect the character of existing low-density development through the regulation of
scale, siting, structure orientation, and setbacks.

LU 7.11

Permit, through Council or administrative conditional use approval, variations from
established standards for planned large developments in neighborhood residential
areas, to promote high-quality design that





52

•
•
•
•
•

is compatible with the character of the area,
enhances and preserves natural features and functions,
encourages the construction of affordable housing,
allows for development and design flexibility, and
protects environmentally critical areas.

Such developments should not be considered as sole evidence of changed
circumstances to justify future rezones of the site or adjacent properties.
LU 7.12

Emphasize measures that can increase housing choices for low-income individuals
and families when considering changes to development standards in neighborhood
residential areas.

Multifamily Residential Areas
Discussion

The city’s multifamily areas contain a variety of housing types. You might find duplexes or
town houses, walk-up apartments or highrise towers. These structures may include units
that are owned by the residents or may provide rental housing. Overall, these areas offer
more choices for people with different living styles and a wider range of incomes than
neighborhood residential zones.
GOAL
LU G8

Allow a variety of housing types and densities that is suitable for a broad array of
households and income levels, and that promotes walking and transit use near
employment concentrations, residential services, and amenities.

POLICIES
LU 8.1

Designate as multifamily residential areas those places that either are
predominantly occupied by multifamily development or are within urban centers or
urban villages.

LU 8.2

Maintain a variety of multifamily zoning classifications that allow development at
different densities, scales, and configurations and that are well suited to the variety
of specific conditions and development goals in diverse areas of the city.

LU 8.3

Provide housing for Seattleites at all income levels in development that is
compatible with the desired neighborhood character and that contributes to highquality, livable urban neighborhoods.

LU 8.4

Establish evaluation criteria for rezoning land to multifamily designations that
support the urban village strategy, create desirable multifamily residential
neighborhoods, maintain compatible scale, respect views, enhance the streetscape





53

and pedestrian environment, and achieve an efficient use of the land without major
impact on the natural environment.
LU 8.5

Allow multifamily areas to be reclassified to compatible pedestrian-friendly
commercial/mixed-use areas, when such action is consistent with the urban village
strategy or approved in an adopted neighborhood plan.

LU 8.6

Establish multifamily residential use as the predominant use in multifamily areas
and limit the number and type of nonresidential uses to preserve the residential
character of these areas, protect these areas from negative impacts of incompatible
uses, and maintain development opportunities for residential use.

LU 8.7

Encourage multifamily developments with units that have direct access to
residential amenities, such as ground-level open space, to increase their appeal for
families with children.

LU 8.8

Allow a variety of attached housing types to accommodate a wide diversity of
households in multifamily zones.

LU 8.9

Establish lowrise multifamily zones to accommodate various housing choices in
the low- to moderate-density range suitable for a broad array of households and
incomes, including walk-up apartments, town houses, row houses, duplexes,
triplexes, and cottage housing.

LU 8.10 Designate lowrise multifamily zones in places where low-scale buildings can provide
a gradual transition betweenneighborhood residential zones and more intensive
multifamily or commercial areas.
LU 8.11

Use midrise multifamily zones to provide greater concentrations of housing in urban
villages and urban centers.

LU 8.12

Emphasize residential character in the development standards for midrise
multifamily zones and allow for scale and building types that differ from those in
less intensive residential areas to accommodate a greater density of development to
support nearby businesses.

LU 8.13

Use highrise multifamily zoning designations only in urban centers, where the
mix of activities offers convenient access to regional transit and to a full range of
residential services and amenities, as well as to jobs.

LU 8.14 Ensure that midrise and highrise development balances the desire to accommodate
larger-scale, high-density development with the need to maintain livability through
controls on such impacts as shadows, bulk, open space, and traffic.
LU 8.15 Permit street-level commercial uses in midrise and highrise neighborhoods to allow
residents greater access to services and to promote an active street environment
without detracting from the overall residential character desired for high-density
neighborhoods.





54

Commercial/Mixed-Use Areas
Discussion

Commercial/mixed-use zones are places meant to provide jobs and services. Most of these
zones also allow housing. Since 2005, almost two-thirds of new housing units in the city
have been built in these zones. Housing might be built as a stand-alone structure or along
with commercial space. Mixed-use areas or projects contain residential and commercial
uses. Mixed-use projects often have offices or stores on the ground floor with housing
above.
The Land Use Code identifies several different types of commercial zones. These zones provide flexibility to developers and are meant to create communities with a variety of activities. Structures in these zones can be built to different heights depending on where they are
located. The general commercial zones tend to be found on major arterials and are more
auto-oriented. Neighborhood Commercial and Seattle Mixed zones use development standards that produce more walkable environments and are better for housing development.
GOAL
LU G9

Create and maintain successful commercial/mixed-use areas that provide a focus
for the surrounding neighborhood and that encourage new businesses, provide
stability and expansion opportunities for existing businesses, and promote
neighborhood vitality, while also accommodating residential development in livable
environments.

POLICIES
LU 9.1

Prioritize the preservation, improvement, and expansion of existing commercial/
mixed-use areas over the creation of new business districts in order to strengthen
the existing areas.

LU 9.2

Encourage the development of compact, concentrated commercial/mixed-use
areas, in urban centers and urban villages, where pedestrians can easily access
transit and a variety of businesses.

LU 9.3

Provide a range of commercial-zone classifications to allow different mixes and
intensities of activity, varying scales of development, varying degrees of residential
or commercial orientation, and varying degrees of pedestrian or auto orientation.

LU 9.4

Apply development standards that distinguish between pedestrian-oriented
commercial zones, which are compatible with and easily accessible from their
surrounding neighborhoods, and general commercial zones, which accommodate
uses that are more dependent on automobile access.





55

LU 9.5

Support a wide range of uses in commercial areas, taking into account the intended
pedestrian, automobile, or residential orientation of the area, the area’s role in the
urban village strategy, and the impacts that the uses could have on surrounding
areas.

LU 9.6

Encourage housing in mixed-use developments in pedestrian-oriented commercial/
mixed-use areas to provide additional opportunities for residents to live in neighborhoods where they can walk to transit, services, and employment.

LU 9.7

Apply limits on the size of specific uses in commercial areas when those limits would
•

help ensure that the scale of uses is compatible with the character and
function of the commercial area;

•

discourage uses likely to attract significant vehicular traffic from locating in
pedestrian-oriented commercial areas;

•

promote compatible land use and transportation patterns;

•

foster healthy commercial development; or

•

provide opportunities for small local businesses to locate, especially in
culturally relevant business districts throughout the city.

LU 9.8

Limit the creation or expansion of uses that generate high volumes of vehicle
traffic by reviewing proposals for such uses in order to control the associated
traffic impacts and ensure that the uses are compatible with the character of the
commercial area and its surroundings.

LU 9.9

Limit new drive-in businesses and accessory drive-in facilities in pedestrian oriented commercial/mixed-use areas and in other locations by using development
standards that address the potential for traffic impacts, pedestrian/vehicle conflicts,
and disruption of an area’s business frontage, as well as the overall appearance of
the commercial area.

LU 9.10 Prohibit or limit the location and size of outdoor uses and activities in certain
commercial areas, according to the area’s function and its proximity to residentially
zoned lots, in order to maintain and improve the continuity of the commercial street
front, reduce the visual and noise impacts associated with such outdoor activities,
and remain compatible with adjacent residential areas.
LU 9.11

Preserve active streetscapes in pedestrian-oriented commercial/mixed-use areas by
limiting residential uses along the street frontage of the ground floor and by keeping
those spaces available primarily for commercial uses and other uses that help
activate the street, in order to strengthen business districts.

LU 9.12 Allow street-level residential uses outside pedestrian-oriented areas and apply
standards that give ground-floor tenants privacy and to create visual interest along
the street front.
LU 9.13 Provide amenity areas for use by residents of housing in commercial/mixed-use
areas.





56

LU 9.14 Assign height limits to commercial/mixed-use areas independent of the commercial
zone designations but consistent with the intended intensity of development in the
zone. Allow different areas within a zone to be assigned different height limits based
on the need to
•
•
•
•
•
LU 9.15

further the urban village strategy’s goals of focusing growth in urban villages,
accommodate the desired functions and intensity of development,
provide a compatible scale relationship with existing zoning in the vicinity,
accommodate desired transitions with development in adjacent areas, and
consider potential view blockage.

Allow limited exceptions to the height limit in order to accommodate ground-floor
commercial uses or special rooftop features, encourage development of mixed use structures, enable structures to function appropriately, accommodate special
features consistent with the special character or function of an area, or support
innovative design that furthers the goals of this Plan.

LU 9.16 Apply appropriate development standards to promote compatible conditions along
the edges of commercial zones abutting residential zones.
LU 9.17

LU 9.18

Use a development pattern, mix of uses, and intensity of activity generally oriented
to pedestrian and transit use in pedestrian-oriented commercial/mixed-use zones
to achieve
•

a compatible blend of commercial and residential uses;

•

strong, healthy business districts that reinforce a sense of place while
providing essential goods, services, and livelihoods for Seattleites, especially
residents who are within walking distance of these places;

•

mixes of commercial activity that are compatible with development in
adjacent areas;

•

residential development that is both appealing to residents and compatible
with the desired commercial function of the area; and

•

an active, attractive, accessible, walkable pedestrian environment with
continuous commercial street frontages.

Apply pedestrian-oriented commercial zones in places where residential uses are in
close proximity and where the allowed development intensity conforms in size and
scale to the community it serves.

LU 9.19 Locate and provide access to accessory parking facilities in pedestrian-oriented
commercial zones in ways that avoid conflicts with pedestrian routes and
interruptions to the continuity of the street facade, such as by locating unenclosed
parking to the side of or behind the building, or by enclosing parking below the
building or within the building and screening it from the street, preferably by other
uses.
LU 9.20 Use general commercial zones to support existing auto-oriented commercial areas
that serve a citywide or regional clientele and have easy access to principal arterials,





57

or in areas that border industrial zones, where they can help to maintain compatible
development conditions.
LU 9.21 Encourage the conversion of general commercial areas within urban villages
to pedestrian-oriented commercial zones, in keeping with this Plan’s goals for
pedestrian-oriented environments within the urban villages.
LU 9.22 Accommodate the broadest range of commercial activities in general commercial
areas, including retail uses of all sizes, small office buildings, warehouses, and light
and general manufacturing facilities.
LU 9.23 Use zoning and other planning tools in urban centers and urban villages to address
displacement of small locally-owned businesses that reinforce local neighborhood
and cultural identity and provide culturally relevant goods and services to Seattle’s
diverse population.
LU 9.24 Explore tools to encourage the creation of small commercial spaces in new
development that can accommodate small, local, and culturally relevant
businesses, particularly those businesses threatened with displacement.

Industrial Areas
Discussion

Seattle has a long history as the main shipping, manufacturing, and freight-distribution center for the region. These days, those activities take place mostly in industrial zones located
in the city’s two manufacturing/industrial centers. These industrial areas are large and generally flat. In these areas, City zoning rules allow industrial activity such as manufacturing,
warehousing, and shipping of goods through waterways, railways, and highways.
Industrial zones are an important source of living wage jobs and make the local economic
base more stable. Having industrial activity in the city makes Seattle less vulnerable to shifts
in the economy. Due to the volume of truck traffic, the need some industrial businesses
have for access to rail service, and the large sites that many of those businesses need, it is
important to provide large, separate areas for these activities.
GOAL
LU G10

Provide sufficient land with the necessary characteristics to allow industrial activity
to thrive in Seattle and protect the preferred industrial function of these areas from
activities that could disrupt or displace them.

POLICIES
LU 10.1

Designate industrial zones generally where





58

LU 10.2

•

the primary functions are industrial activity and industrial-related
commercial functions,

•

the basic infrastructure needed to support industrial uses already exists,

•

areas are large enough to allow a full range of industrial activities to function
successfully, and

•

sufficient separation or special conditions exist to reduce the possibility of
conflicts with development in adjacent less intensive areas.

Preserve industrial land for industrial uses, especially where industrial land is near
rail- or water-transportation facilities, in order to allow marine- and rail-related
industries that rely on that transportation infrastructure to continue to function in
the city.

LU 10.3 Accommodate the expansion of current industrial businesses and promote
opportunities for new industrial businesses within Seattle to strengthen the city’s
existing industrial economy.
LU 10.4 Restrict to appropriate locations within industrial areas those activities that—by the
nature of materials involved or processes employed—are potentially dangerous or
very noxious.
LU 10.5 Provide a range of industrial zones that address varying conditions and priorities
in different industrial areas. Those priorities include maintaining industrial areas
that have critical supporting infrastructure, providing transitions between industrial
areas and less intensive areas, and promoting high-quality environments attractive
to business expansion or to new industrial activities.
LU 10.6 Prohibit new residential development in industrial zones, except for certain types
of dwellings, such as caretaker units, that are related to the industrial area and that
would not restrict or disrupt industrial activity.
LU 10.7

Use the general industrial zones to promote a full range of industrial activities and
related support uses.

LU 10.8 Apply the general industrial zones mostly within the designated manufacturing/
industrial centers, where impacts from industrial activity are less likely to affect
residential or commercial uses. Outside of manufacturing/industrial centers, general
industrial zones may be appropriate along waterways used for maritime uses.
LU 10.9 Avoid placing industrial zones within urban centers or urban villages. However, in
locations where a center or village borders a manufacturing/industrial center, use
of the industrial commercial zone within the center or village where it abuts the
manufacturing/industrial center may provide an appropriate transition to help
separate residential uses from heavier industrial activities.
LU 10.10 Limit the density of development for nonindustrial uses in the manufacturing/
industrial centers to reduce competition from nonindustrial activities that are better
suited to other locations in the city, particularly urban centers and urban villages,
where this Plan encourages most new residential and commercial development.
Permit commercial uses in industrial areas only if they reinforce the industrial





59

character, and strictly limit the size of office and retail uses not associated with
industrial uses, in order to preserve these areas for industrial development.
LU 10.11 Recognize the unique working character of industrial areas by keeping landscaping
and street standards to a minimum to allow flexibility for industrial activities, except
along selected arterials where installing street trees and providing screening and
landscaping can offset impacts of new industrial development in highly visible
locations.
LU 10.12 Set parking and loading requirements in industrial zones to provide adequate
parking and loading facilities to support business activity, promote air quality,
encourage efficient use of the land in industrial areas, discourage underused
parking facilities, and maintain adequate traffic safety and circulation. Allow some
on-street loading and occasional spillover parking.
LU 10.13 Maintain standards for the size and location of vehicle curb cuts and driveways in
industrial zones in order to balance the need to provide adequate maneuvering and
loading areas with availability of on-street parking and safe pedestrian access.
LU 10.14 Permit noise levels in industrial areas, except buffer areas, that would not be
allowed in other parts of the city, in recognition of the importance and special
nature of industrial activities.
LU 10.15 Classify certain industrial activities as conditional uses in industrial zones in order
to accommodate these uses while making sure they are compatible with the zone’s
primary industrial function and to protect public safety and welfare on nearby
sites. Require mitigation of impacts on industrial activity and on the immediate
surroundings, especially nearby less intensive zones.
LU 10.16 Prohibit uses that attract large numbers of people to the industrial area for
nonindustrial purposes, in order to keep the focus on industrial activity and to
minimize potential conflicts from the noise, nighttime activity, and truck movement
that accompanies industrial activity.
LU 10.17 Establish the industrial buffer zone to provide an appropriate transition between
industrial areas and adjacent residential or pedestrian-oriented commercial zones.
LU 10.18 Allow the widest possible range of manufacturing uses and related industrial and
commercial activities within the industrial buffer zone, while ensuring compatibility
with the activity and physical character of neighboring less intensive zones.
LU 10.19 Include development standards or performance standards for the industrial
buffer zone that protect the livability of neighboring areas, promote visual quality,
and maintain a compatible scale of development along zone edges. Apply these
standards only in places where existing conditions do not adequately separate
industrial activity from less intensive zones.
LU 10.20 Limit the height of structures on the borders of industrial buffer zones where streets
along the zone edge do not provide sufficient separation for a reasonable transition
in scale between industrial areas and less intensive neighboring zones, taking into
consideration the permitted height in the abutting less intensive zone.





60

LU 10.21 Allow a wide mix of employment activities in the industrial commercial zones, such
as light manufacturing and research and development.
LU 10.22 Limit development density in industrial commercial zones in order to reflect
transportation and other infrastructure constraints, while taking into account other
features of an area.
LU 10.23 Include development standards in the industrial commercial zone designed to
create environments that are attractive to new technology businesses and that
support a pedestrian-oriented environment, while controlling structure height and
scale to limit impacts on nearby neighborhoods.
LU 10.24 Provide a range of maximum building height limits in the industrial commercial
zones in order to protect the distinctive features that attract new technology businesses to the area—such as views of water, shoreline access, and the neighborhood
scale and character—to make sure that these features will continue to be enjoyed,
both within the zone and from the surrounding area.
LU 10.25 Assign height limits independently of the industrial zoning designation to provide
flexibility in zoning-specific areas and to allow different areas within a zone to be
assigned different height limits according to the rezone criteria.
LU 10.26 Restrict or prohibit uses that may negatively affect the availability of land for
industrial activity, or that conflict with the character and function of industrial areas.
LU 10.27 Consider high value-added, living wage industrial activities to be a high priority.
LU 10.28 Permit commercial uses in industrial areas to the extent that they reinforce the
industrial character, and limit specified non-industrial uses, including office and
retail development, in order to preserve these areas for industrial development.

Downtown Areas
Discussion

Downtown is the most densely developed area in the Pacific Northwest. It includes five distinct neighborhoods: Belltown, Denny Triangle, the Commercial Core, Pioneer Square, and
Chinatown/International District. Because each of these neighborhoods has a unique character, the City has a different plan for how each is expected to grow. This makes regulations
for development in Downtown very detailed and complex. For this reason, the guidance for
Downtown regulations is not found in this element. Instead, it can be found as part of the
Downtown Urban Center Neighborhood Plan, located in the Neighborhood Plans volume
of this Plan.





61

GOAL
LU G11

Promote Downtown Seattle as an urban center with the densest mix of residential
and commercial development in the region, with a vital and attractive environment
that supports employment and residential activities and is inviting to visitors.

POLICIES
LU 11.1

Recognize the distinct areas of Downtown that are defined by their histories and
by their primary land use function, such as office, retail, or mixed-use with either a
commercial or a residential emphasis.

LU 11.2

Use a range of land use zones and height limits to support the existing and desired
character of different areas within Downtown.

Location-Specific Regulations
Discussion

In certain places in the city, different sets of rules “overlay” the zoning regulations. These
overlays take into account a special use or characteristic of the area. For example, historic
districts each have a separate set of regulations that preserve the area’s unique historic
features. The policies in this section guide how the City adjusts its regulations to the special
functions and needs of major institutions, historic districts and landmarks, and environmentally critical areas. These policies generally describe overlays that could be applied in
several places within the city. In addition to the areas covered in this section, the Land Use
Code contains regulations governing specific overlay districts that apply only in certain locations, such as major institution overlays or the Pike/Pine corridor. There is also an overlay
that applies to the shorelines along major water bodies in the city. Policies for that overlay
can be found in the Shoreline Areas element of this Plan.
GOAL
LU G12

Provide flexibility in standard zone provisions or supplement those provisions to
achieve special public purposes in areas where unique conditions exist, such as
shorelines, historic and special review districts, and major institutions.

POLICIES
LU 12.1

Allow for zoning overlay districts, which modify the regulations of the underlying
zoning, to address special circumstances and issues of significant public interest in
subareas of the city.





62

LU 12.2

Establish a master planned community zone and apply the zone as a way to address
unique opportunities for large site redevelopments in the densest areas of the
city. Use this designation to provide predictability to the City, the community, and
potential developers, with the intent to encourage a mix of uses at appropriate
urban densities that use a cohesive urban design and promote high levels of
environmental sustainability, housing affordability, and publicly accessible open
space. Designate a master planned community only for large multiblock sites inside
an urban center that are subject to unified control.

LU 12.3

Consider establishing a master planning process for large sites outside of urban
centers in order to allow development that incorporates good urban design and
appropriate public benefits.

LU 12.4 Regulate development and promote design guidelines in the stadium area transition
overlay to promote an environment that is attractive and safe for the large volumes
of pedestrians attending events in the area.

Major Institutions
Discussion

Hospitals, colleges, and universities deliver vital services to residents of Seattle and the
Pacific Northwest. They employ one in eight Seattle workers and make the city’s economy
more diverse. However, they can also increase traffic and displace housing and businesses.
The policies in this section help guide the City in allowing these institutions to grow, while
mitigating the impacts of that growth on the livability of surrounding neighborhoods.
GOAL
LU G13

Encourage the benefits that major institutions offer the city and the region,
including health care, educational services, and significant employment
opportunities, while mitigating the adverse impacts associated with their
development and geographic expansion.

POLICIES
LU 13.1

Designate the campuses of large hospitals, colleges, and universities as major
institutions, making clear that they are defined under a separate public process in
terms of their appropriate uses and development standards.

LU 13.2

Support the coordinated growth of major institutions through conceptual master
plans and the creation of major institution overlay districts. Use a master plan
process to identify development standards for the overlay district that are
specifically tailored to the major institution and the surrounding area.





63

LU 13.3

Balance the need for major institutions to grow and change with the need to
maintain the livability and vitality of neighboring areas.

LU 13.4 Establish major institution overlays (MIO) as a designation on the Official Land
Use Map and the Future Land Use Map to show areas where development is
regulated by the contents of a master plan, rather than by the underlying zoning.
Where appropriate, establish MIO boundaries for better integration between major
institution areas and less intensive zones.
LU 13.5

Encourage community involvement in the development, monitoring, implementation, and amendment of major institution master plans, including the establishment
of citizens’ advisory committees that include community and major institution
representatives.

LU 13.6

Allow the MIO to modify underlying zoning provisions and development standards,
including use restrictions and parking requirements, in order to accommodate
the changing needs of major institutions, provide development flexibility, and
encourage a high-quality environment.

LU 13.7

Discourage the expansion of established major institution boundaries.

LU 13.8 Require either that a master plan be prepared or that the existing master plan be
revised when a proposed major development that is part of a major institution does
not conform to the underlying zoning and is not included in an existing master plan.
LU 13.9 Locate new major institutions in areas where their activities are compatible with
the surrounding land uses and where the impacts associated with existing and
future development can be appropriately mitigated, and provide procedures for
considering the establishment of new major institutions.
LU 13.10 Define as major institution uses those that are part of, or substantively related to,
the major institution’s central mission or that primarily and directly serve institution
users, and allow these uses within the MIO district, in accordance with the
development standards of the underlying zoning classifications or adopted master
plan.
LU 13.11 Apply the development standards of the underlying zoning classification to all major
institution development, except for specific standards altered by a master plan.
LU 13.12 Determine appropriate measures to address the need for adequate transition
between the major institution and surrounding uses.
LU 13.13 Establish minimum parking requirements in each MIO district to address the needs
of the major institution and reduce parking demand in nearby areas. Include
maximum parking limits to avoid unnecessary traffic in the surrounding areas and
to limit the use of single-occupant vehicles. Allow an increase in the number of
permitted spaces only when such an increase is needed to reduce parking demand
on surrounding streets and when it will help to minimize traffic congestion in the
area.
LU 13.14 Use a transportation-management program to reduce the number of vehicle
trips to the major institution and to limit the adverse impacts of traffic and of
institution-related parking on surrounding streets, especially residential streets.





64

Strive to reduce the number of single-occupant vehicles used for trips to and from
major institutions at peak times. Allow short-term or long-term parking space
requirements to be modified as part of a transportation-management program.
LU 13.15 Encourage housing preservation within major institution overlay districts and limit
impacts on housing in surrounding areas. Discourage conversion or demolition of
housing within a major institution’s campus, allowing it only when the institution
needs to expand or when the institution replaces the lost housing with new
housing. Prohibit the demolition of noninstitutional housing for replacement
by principal-use parking that is not necessary to meet the parking requirement.
Prohibit development by a major institution outside of the MIO district boundaries
when it would result in the demolition or conversion of residential buildings into
nonresidential uses, unless authorized by an adopted master plan.
LU 13.16 Require a master plan whenever a major institution proposes development that
could affect the livability of adjacent neighborhoods or that has the potential for
significant adverse impacts on the surrounding areas. Use the master plan to
•

guide a comprehensive review of potential benefits and impacts of the major
institution’s proposed development,

•

establish or modify geographic boundaries for the major institution and
establish clear guidelines and development standards on which the
major institutions and community can rely for long-term planning and
development,

•

provide the neighborhood with advance notice of the institution’s
development plans,

•

allow the City to anticipate and plan for public capital or programmatic
actions that will be needed to accommodate development,

•

provide the basis for determining appropriate mitigating actions to avoid or
reduce adverse impacts from major institution growth,

•

establish a transportation-management program, and

•

define the major institution’s development program for a specified time
period.

LU 13.17 Require City Council review and adoption of the master plan after the major
institution, the surrounding community, and the City develop the master plan.
LU 13.18 Achieve a better relationship between residential, commercial, or industrial uses
and the major institution’s activities when considering rezones, while also trying to
reduce or eliminate major land use conflicts.





65

Historic Preservation and Cultural Resources
Discussion

Historic preservation recognizes and protects aspects of our shared cultural heritage—
buildings, districts, and designed landscapes that link to Seattle’s past. From the Native
Americans who first established trading centers along the Duwamish River to the latest
waves of newcomers from around the world, all have left their mark. Over time, Seattle has
acquired historic features that have become part of the city’s civic identity. Through the
preservation of icons and historic locations such as the Space Needle, the Olmsted network
of parks and boulevards, and Pioneer Square, the city can continue to celebrate its heritage
and maintain its unique sense of place.
Seattle values its past and recognizes and protects its heritage. One way we do this is by
calling out more than 450 buildings, objects, and sites of exceptional significance, and eight
historic districts. These visible connections to the past strengthen our sense of place and
help build community. Finding new uses for existing structures also helps achieve the City’s
goals for sustainable development, because reusing historic buildings is more sustainable
than demolishing and replacing them. Preserving and restoring historic buildings can encourage other revitalization in the neighborhood and attract new businesses.
The benefits of historic preservation are not merely aesthetic. Preservation is integral to our
economic-development, and it also enhances our city’s identity as a center for tourism, itself an important source of local jobs. Preserving historic buildings can help incubate small
locally-owned businesses, revitalize commercial districts, and generate local jobs. Historic
preservation promotes sustainability through the reuse, repair, and upgrading of existing
built resources.
GOAL
LU G14

Maintain the city’s cultural identity and heritage.

POLICIES
LU 14.1

Maintain a comprehensive survey and inventory of Seattle’s historic and cultural
resources. Update the survey and inventory when developing a new community
plan or updating an existing plan, as appropriate.

LU 14.2 Support the designation of areas as historic and special review districts, and the
designation of structures, sites, and objects as City of Seattle landmarks in order to
protect, enhance, and perpetuate their historical or architectural identities.





66

LU 14.3 Tailor development standards and design review processes specifically for a special
review district to describe design-related features allowed, encouraged, limited,
or excluded from the district. Allow adopted guidelines to modify, exempt, or
supersede the underlying zone’s standards.
LU 14.4

Encourage the adaptive reuse of designated landmark structures by allowing uses
in these structures that may not otherwise be allowed under the applicable zoning,
provided such action is approved by the Landmarks Preservation Board.

LU 14.5 Use incentives, including the transfer of development rights, to encourage property
owners and developers to restore or reuse designated landmark structures and
specified structures in designated districts.
LU 14.6 Consider the use of conservation districts to recognize and sustain the character of
unique residential or commercial districts.
LU 14.7

Protect the scale and character of the established development pattern, while
encouraging compatible and context-sensitive infill development.

LU 14.8 Expand outreach mechanisms to encourage historic preservation projects in
neighborhoods and communities that have not traditionally benefited from historic
preservation efforts, with particular focus on areas with high concentrations of
under-served and/or under-represented people.
LU 14.9 Identify historic resources that can be successfully used to meet the city’s housing
goals.
LU 14.10 Identify, preserve, and protect archaeological resources.

GOAL
LU G15

Promote the economic opportunities and benefits of historic preservation.

POLICIES
LU 15.1

Recognize the economic value of Seattle’s historic resources in attracting tourism;
encourage reinvestment of a share of the revenue derived from tourism to sustain
and expand historic preservation.

LU 15.2 Encourage rehabilitation opportunities and reinvesting in vacant or underutilized
historic properties to spark economic revitalization.
LU 15.3

Encourage rehabilitation of existing housing units and other building types that
expands affordable housing choices and contributes to market-rate and workforce
housing.

LU 15.4 Explore and provide various financial and regulatory incentives, if possible, to allow
for the productive, reasonable, and adaptive reuse of historic resources.





67

GOAL
LU G16

Promote the environmental benefits of preserving and adaptively reusing historic
buildings.

POLICIES
LU 16.1

Encourage rehabilitation and adaptive reuse of buildings to conserve resources,
reduce waste, and demonstrate stewardship of the built environment.

LU 16.2

Promote seismic and energy efficiency retrofits of historic buildings to reduce
carbon emissions, save money, and improve public safety.

LU 16.3

Encourage the creation of ecodistricts to achieve sustainability and resource
efficiency at a district scale.

Environmentally Critical Areas
Discussion

While Seattle is essentially a built city, there remain many natural areas that deserve
special attention and care. Taking care of these areas is important for conservation but also
to prevent possible harm to other parts of the city. For example, landslides, floods, or poor
water quality would affect more than just these vulnerable areas. For these reasons, the City
has regulations that help protect these areas from the wrong types of use or, in some cases,
from use altogether.
GOAL
LU G17

Maintain a regulatory system that aims to
•

protect the ecological functions and values of wetlands and fish and wildlife
conservation areas;

•

prevent erosion on steep slopes;

•

protect public health, safety, and welfare in areas subject to landslides,
liquefaction, floods, or peat settlement, while permitting reasonable
development;

•

protect the public by identifying seismic and volcanic hazard areas; and

•

avoid development that causes physical harm to people, property, public
resources, or the environment.





68

POLICIES
LU 17.1

Use best available science to identify and protect environmentally critical areas.

LU 17.2

Promote both public and private opportunities to improve water quality and
enhance aquatic, wetland, and terrestrial habitats in the city’s environmentally
critical areas so that these habitats are healthy for native wildlife and people.

LU 17.3

Regulate the design and siting of structures and land-disturbing actions associated
with development projects in environmentally critical areas and buffers to
protect the ecological functions and values of environmentally critical areas and
their buffers and to protect public health and safety on development sites and
neighboring properties.

LU 17.4

Permit modification of development standards in environmentally critical areas
and buffers to protect the ecological functions and values of the critical areas while
allowing reasonable development.

LU 17.5

Review rezones in or adjacent to an environmentally critical area or a hazard-prone
area by considering the effects on the ecological functions and values of the critical
area and on public health, safety, and welfare, and recognize that lower-intensity
zones and uses are generally more appropriate than higher-intensity zones in
these areas. Review subdivisions and lot-boundary adjustments in or adjacent to
wetlands, fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas, steep slope–erosion areas,
and other environmentally critical areas by considering the effects on the ecological
functions and values of those critical areas.

LU 17.6

Adopt regulations that encourage landowners and developers to voluntarily
enhance the ecological functions and values of environmentally critical areas.

LU 17.7

Provide opportunities for environmental education associated with environmentally
critical areas.

LU 17.8

Regulate development on landslide-prone hillsides to protect against future
damage due to instability that might be created or exacerbated by development,
including potential damage to public facilities. Consider the relative risk to life or
property when reviewing development proposals for landslide-prone areas.

LU 17.9

Require engineering solutions for development in landslide-prone areas to provide
complete stabilization of the developed area.

LU 17.10 Limit disturbance and maintain and enhance vegetative cover on steep slopes to
control erosion and water runoff in order to reduce the risk of siltation and other
environmental impacts to streams, lakes, Puget Sound, and the City’s stormwater
facilities.
LU 17.11 Require new development in liquefaction-prone areas to be designed and built
to limit property damage and to reduce risks of injury and loss of life during
earthquakes.
LU 17.12 Regulate development on abandoned solid-waste landfill sites and areas within a
thousand feet of those sites to reduce the risks of ground subsidence, earthquake induced ground shaking, and methane-gas accumulation.





69

LU 17.13 Regulate development in peat settlement–prone areas to limit ground settlement
caused by the removal of groundwater and by structural and earth-fill loads on
those areas and nearby parcels.
LU 17.14 Seek a net gain in wetland function by enhancing and restoring wetland functions
across the city in City projects.
LU 17.15 Support efforts to restore wetlands to their original state and natural function.
LU 17.16 Protect Seattle’s unique remaining wetland resources and use mitigation
sequencing to address construction and postconstruction impacts in wetlands and
their buffers by strictly regulating development.
LU 17.17 Seek to avoid a net loss in area of wetland acreage, and require no net loss of
wetland functions and values when development is allowed; functions and values
include but are not limited to flood control, water quantity and quality, and fish and
wildlife habitat.
LU 17.18 Protect existing vegetation in wetlands and their buffers, unless augmenting or
replanting can be shown to better protect the wetland’s functions and values.
LU 17.19 Regulate development in and near designated fish- and wildlife-habitat
conservation areas in order to protect the remaining native wildlife species and
significant fish populations, especially salmonids.
LU 17.20 Regulate development in environmentally critical areas that contain vegetative
cover and physical space for habitat, and seek to
•

protect contiguous wildlife-habitat areas;

•

maintain wildlife corridors that connect functions;

•

conserve soil and ground conditions that support native vegetation;

•

prevent siltation and high water temperatures in downstream habitats;

•

dampen fluctuations in surface-water flows, which are typically problematic
in urbanized areas; and

•

maintain groundwater recharge flow to support stream flows during drier
seasons.

LU 17.21 Establish riparian corridors that include the water course or water body and riparian
management area.
LU 17.22 Limit development within the riparian corridor to protect the natural functions and
values of these areas from the potential negative effects of urban development.
Retain vegetation in its natural condition. If the vegetation within the riparian
corridor is degraded, allow new native plantings that enhance the functions and
values of the riparian corridor.
LU 17.23 Establish development standards to protect existing water quality, prevent erosion
and siltation, and protect fish and wildlife habitats.





70

LU 17.24 Establish an area bordering adjacent bodies of water on every development site,
strictly limit development within such areas, and leave vegetation in its natural
condition unless new plantings will enhance the functions of the buffer.
LU 17.25 Regulate development in flood-prone areas in order to protect public health and
safety, and aquatic habitat, and to prevent damage to private property caused by
hazardous flooding conditions.
LU 17.26 Consider retaining City-owned properties that are in environmentally critical areas
as natural areas.





71

Transportation

Introduction
The Transportation element guides transportation investments to equitably serve the city’s
current residents and businesses and to accommodate Seattle’s future growth. Hundreds of
thousands of city and regional residents and businesses depend on the city’s transportation
system to access jobs, services, and community facilities, and to deliver freight and goods.
Thousands more people will depend on it in the next twenty years as the city and region
continue to grow. In Seattle’s future, a robust transportation system should
•

contribute to a safer city by working to eliminate serious injuries and fatalities on city streets;

•

create an interconnected city where people have reliable, easy-to-use travel options;

•

develop a more vibrant city by creating streets and sidewalks that generate economic
and social activity, adding to the city’s overall health, prosperity, and happiness; and





72

•

contribute to a more affordable city by providing high-quality and affordable
transportation options that allow people to spend money on other things.

Seattle’s transportation system in 2035 will look very different than it does now. For example, the Alaskan Way Viaduct will be gone, and State Route 99 will go through a tunnel in
central Seattle. Light rail transit, streetcar routes, and frequent bus networks will be much
more extensive, with light rail extending through more of the city and providing connections
to Bellevue, Redmond, Shoreline, and Lynnwood. New technological innovations in transportation such as smart parking, shared transportation options (such as bike share and car
share services, whose customers do not own the vehicles they use), and driverless vehicles
will change the way people move through Seattle. This Plan will guide the City’s future
actions to address these and other changes.
As a mature, fully built city, Seattle already has a core network of streets. There is no room
for major new streets, which creates challenges but also opportunities as the City plans for
growth. Making arterial streets wider is unfeasible and undesirable from a cost and environmental standpoint. It would also run counter to the City’s goal to cut greenhouse gas
emissions. Therefore, we must use the streets and sidewalks we have in the most efficient
way possible. This means prioritizing street space so that it can be used by the most people,
at most times of the day, and in a variety of ways. While many people still rely on a personal
car as their best or only transportation option, the City plans to make travel more efficient
and predictable for all by offering high-quality travel options. Improved mobility in the
future will also require looking for opportunities to remove or reduce choke points such as
railroad crossings and to use new traffic-signal timing and other technologies to help move
people and goods.
The Transportation Appendix contains inventories of transportation facilities and an analysis of the transportation effects of this Plan’s growth strategy.

Integrating Land Use and Transportation
Discussion

The development pattern described in the Growth Strategy and Land Use elements of this
Plan has a major influence on the City’s transportation system. The City’s growth strategy
focuses growth in urban centers, urban villages, and manufacturing/industrial centers.
Crucial to the success of these areas is reliable transportation to, from, and within these
areas. This will require a transportation system that includes several methods of travel for
all trips throughout the day, including during the evening and on weekends. Automobile
and freight access to property will remain important for accommodating growth throughout
the city.





73

The City can make improvements to better connect people to urban centers and urban
villages by many travel options, especially by transit and bicycle. In addition, transportation
facilities that connect to and support the city’s two manufacturing/industrial centers are very
important to the city’s economy. Seattle must find the right balance between serving the areas
that will see the most growth and providing transportation services to all who need it, including those in parts of Seattle that have historically seen less investment in transportation.
GOAL
TG 1

Ensure that transportation decisions, strategies, and investments support the City’s
overall growth strategy and are coordinated with this Plan’s land use goals.

POLICIES
T 1.1

Provide safe and reliable transportation facilities and services to promote and
accommodate the growth this Plan anticipates in urban centers, urban villages, and
manufacturing/industrial centers.

T 1.2

Improve transportation connections to urban centers and villages from all Seattle
neighborhoods, particularly by providing a variety of affordable travel options
(pedestrian, transit, and bicycle facilities) and by being attentive to the needs of
vulnerable and marginalized communities.

T 1.3

Design transportation infrastructure in urban centers and villages to support
compact, accessible, and walkable neighborhoods for all ages and abilities.

T 1.4

Design transportation facilities to be compatible with planned land uses and
consider the planned scale and character of the surrounding neighborhood.

T 1.5

Invest in transportation projects and programs that further progress toward
meeting Seattle’s mode-share goals, in Transportation Figures 1 and 2, and reduce
dependence on personal automobiles, particularly in urban centers.

Transportation Figure 1
Mode-Share Targets for All Work Trips* to Seattle and Its Urban Centers

Percentage of work trips made by travel modes other than driving alone
Area

2014

2035 Target

Downtown

77%

85%

First Hill/Capitol Hill

58%

70%

Uptown

48%

60%

South Lake Union

67%

80%





74

Area

2014

2035 Target

University District

73%

85%

Northgate

30%

50%

Seattle

57%

65%

*work trips terminating in the city or urban center

Transportation Figure 2
Mode-Share Targets for Residents of Seattle and Its Urban Centers

Percentage of non-work* trips made using travel modes other than driving alone
Area

2014

2035 Target

Downtown

88%

90%

First Hill/Capitol Hill

80%

85%

Uptown

82%

85%

South Lake Union

76%

85%

University District

79%

90%

Northgate

46%

55%

Seattle

67%

75%

*non-work trips that have both their origin and destination within the city or urban center

T 1.6

Enhance goods movement to, within, and between Seattle’s manufacturing/
industrial centers and urban villages and business districts.

T 1.7

Recognize the connection between transportation choices and climate change and
work to reduce vehicular emissions.

Make the Best Use of the Streets We Have
Discussion

The public street space in Seattle needs to accommodate several different functions to
serve existing and future activity. Because it will be difficult to expand this available public
street space in any significant way, it is important for the City to use the existing streets





75

efficiently and wisely. This section of the Plan establishes the policy framework for making
those decisions.
The City has adopted master plans to address nonautomobile modes of travel—pedestrian,
bicycle, transit, and freight movement—drawing on extensive community input. In planning for how to use streets, it is useful to look at the need to provide space for pedestrian
activities, travelways for various types of vehicles, and a flex area along the curb for making
transitions. Pedestrian activities include walking as well as utilizing bus shelters, bike racks,
and sidewalk cafés. The flex area provides parking, bus stops, and passenger and freight
loading, and the area that is used for parking may be used for mobility during peak times.
In addition, space should be available for parklets, play streets, and other activating uses
of the street. Providing space for all these functions efficiently and where they are needed
helps make the most of a limited resource.
Not every function can fit in every street. The goals and policies in this section provide direction on integrating and, where necessary, prioritizing functions within the different parts
of a street. These policies also recognize that collectively two or more streets can combine
to serve as a “complete corridor,” since not every street can accommodate every need.
GOAL
TG 2

Allocate space on Seattle’s streets to safely and efficiently connect and move
people and goods to their destinations while creating inviting spaces within the
rights-of-way.

POLICIES
T 2.1

Devote space in the street right-of-way to accommodate multiple functions of
mobility, access for commerce and people, activation, landscaping, and storage of
vehicles.

T 2.2

Ensure that the street network accommodates multiple travel modes, including
transit, freight movement, pedestrians, people with disabilities, bicycles, general
purpose traffic, and shared transportation options.

T 2.3

Consider safety concerns, modal master plans, and adjacent land uses when
prioritizing functions in the pedestrian, travelway, and flex zones of the right-of-way.

T 2.4

Use pedestrian design guidance in the Right-of-Way Improvements Manual and
policy guidance from the modal master plans to determine adequacy of the
pedestrian realm, before allocating space to the flex zone or travelway. Within the
pedestrian realm, prioritize space to address safety concerns, network connectivity,
and activation.

T 2.5

Prioritize mobility needs in the street travelway based on safety concerns and then
on the recommended networks and facilities identified in the respective modal
plans.





76

T 2.6

Allocate space in the flex zone to accommodate access, activation, and greening
functions, except when use of the flex zone for mobility is critical to address safety
or to meet connectivity needs identified in modal master plans. When mobility is
needed only part of the day, design the space to accommodate other functions at
other times.

T 2.7

Assign space in the flex zone to support nearby land uses, provide support for modal
plan priorities, and accommodate multiple functions.

Transportation Figure 3
Priorities for Right-of-Way “Flex Zone” by Predominant Use of Area
Commercial/Mixed-Use Areas

Industrial Areas

Residential Areas

Modal plan priorities

Modal plan priorities

Modal plan priorities

Access for commerce

Access for commerce

Access for people

Access for people

Access for people

Access for commerce

Activation

Storage

Greening

Greening

Activation

Storage

Storage

Greening

Activation

T 2.8

Employ the following tactics to resolve potential conflicts for space in the right-ofway:
•

Implement transportation and parking-demand management strategies to
encourage more efficient use of the existing right of way

•

Allocate needed functions across a corridor composed of several streets or
alleys, if all functions cannot fit in a single street

•

Share space between travel modes and uses where safe and where possible
over the course of the day

•

Prioritize assignment of space to shared and shorter-duration uses

•

Encourage off-street accommodation for nonmobility uses, including parking
and transit layover

T 2.9

Develop a decision-making framework to direct the planning, design, and
optimization of street right-of-way.

T 2.10

Identify street types in the Right-of-Way Improvements Manual, and have those
street types correspond to the land uses designated in this Plan.





77

T 2.11

Design sidewalks in urban centers, urban villages, and areas designated as
pedestrian zones in the Land Use Code to meet the dimensional standards as
specified in the Right-of-Way Improvements Manual to foster vibrant pedestrian
environments in these areas.

T 2.12

Designate the following classifications of arterials:
•

Principal arterials: roadways that are intended to serve as the primary
routes for moving traffic through the city and for connecting urban centers
and urban villages to one another or to the regional transportation network

•

Minor arterials: roadways that distribute traffic from principal arterials to
collector arterials and access streets

•

Collector arterials: roadways that collect and distribute traffic from
principal and minor arterials to local access streets or provide direct access
to destinations

T 2.13

Preserve and enhance the boulevard network both for travel and as a usable openspace system for active transportation modes.

T 2.14

Maintain, preserve, and enhance the City’s alleys as a valuable network for public
spaces and access, loading and unloading for freight, and utility operations.

T 2.15

Create vibrant public spaces in and near the right-of-way that foster social
interaction, promote access to walking, bicycling, and transit options, and enhance
the public realm.

Transportation Options
Discussion

Transit, bicycling, walking, and shared transportation services reduce collisions, stress,
noise, and air pollution, while increasing social contact, economic vitality, affordability, and
overall health. They also help use right-of-way space more efficiently and at lower costs. The
best way to get Seattleites to take advantage of these options is to make them easy choices
for people of all ages and abilities.
The plans that the City has developed for individual travel modes (pedestrian, bicycle, and
transit) include strategies and projects that will improve transportation choices in the city.
These include the Pedestrian Master Plan, the Bicycle Master Plan, and the Transit Master
Plan. In prioritizing investments, these plans balance development levels with equity, ensuring that people who are dependent on transit or vehicle use because of age, disability, or
financial considerations are well served. For more information on the specific investments
that the City plans to make to support transit, bicycle use, and walking, refer to the maps in
Transportation Figures 4–7.





78

Some people in the city have fewer options for travel.
For instance, we know from the American Community
Survey that roughly a quarter of all households of color
in Seattle, including a third of black households, do
not have a motor vehicle at home. Research by King
County found that people in households with incomes
under $35,000 are much more likely than others to rely
on transit for all their transportation needs. Providing
more transit options for these communities is one way
the City can use its transportation planning to improve
race and social equity in the city.

Share of Seattle Households
without Access to a Vehicle
By Race/Ethnicity of Householder

4

24%

5

13%
White, non-Hispanic

Of color

Source: 2011–2013 ACS, US Census Bureau

While not everyone can always walk, bike, use a car-share service, or ride transit, the City
can reduce the number of drive-alone trips that residents, employees, and visitors take,
and even the need to own a personal vehicle. If the City offers people safe, affordable, and
comfortable travel choices, they will be more likely to use them. Improving transportation
choices can protect the environment, enhance the local economy, and support healthy and
sustainable communities. If more people use different types of transportation during the
busiest times of day (generally the late-afternoon peak commute time), more people and
goods can get to their destinations in a reasonable time. Reducing drive-alone trips at this
time of day is consistent with the City’s overall commute-trip reduction goals.
To make these options work, the City needs to help residents understand the options that
are available so they can choose the ones that will work best for them. Having information
about travel choices can influence where people choose to live and how they move about
the city.
In helping residents make these decisions, the City must consider all aspects of the transportation system. One way the City can affect many aspects of the system is through transportation-demand management, a technique that aims to reduce travel impacts on the
system, particularly drive-alone trips at congested times of the day. Transportation-demand
management includes looking at the role of parking, since its availability, cost, and proximity to destinations are important considerations for many as they choose whether to drive or
take advantage of other travel options. Especially for people using transit options to travel
across the city or the region, there is a need to provide efficient ways to get to and from the
transit. This is often called first-mile and last-mile travel because it can involve getting from
home to a transit station on one end of a trip and from a transit station to a job on the other
end. The first and last mile can often be traveled by walking, biking, ride sharing, or local
bus service.





79

Transportation Figure 4
Priority Corridors for Transit Investments


83

GOAL
TG 3

Meet people’s mobility needs by providing equitable access to, and encouraging use
of, multiple transportation options.

POLICIES
T 3.1

Develop and maintain high-quality, affordable, and connected bicycle, pedestrian,
and transit facilities.

T 3.2

Improve transportation options to and within the urban centers and urban villages,
where most of Seattle’s job and population growth will occur.

T 3.3

Consider the income, age, ability, and vehicle-ownership patterns of populations
throughout the city in developing transportation systems and facilities so that all
residents, especially those most in need, have access to a wide range of affordable
travel options.

T 3.4

Develop a citywide transit system that includes a variety of transit modes to meet
passenger capacity needs with frequent, reliable, accessible, and safe service to a
wide variety of destinations throughout the day and week.

T 3.5

Prioritize transit investments on the basis of ridership demand, service to
populations heavily reliant on transit, and opportunities to leverage funding.

T 3.6

Make transit services affordable to low-income residents through programs that
reduce household transportation costs.

T 3.7

Optimize operations of bus rapid transit, RapidRide, and streetcar corridors by
adjusting signals and providing exclusive transit lanes to promote faster travel times
for transit than for automobile travel.

T 3.8

Work with transportation providers, such as car share, bike share and taxi providers,
to provide access to their services throughout the city and to maintain the
affordability of their services.

T 3.9

Expand light rail capacity and bus reliability in corridors where travel capacity is
constrained, such as crossing the Lake Washington Ship Canal or the Duwamish
River, or through the Center City.

T 3.10

Provide high-quality pedestrian, bicycle, and bus transit access to high-capacity
transit stations, in order to support transit ridership and reduce single-occupant
vehicle trips.

T 3.11

Develop and maintain bicycle and pedestrian facilities, including public stairways,
that enhance the predictability and safety of all users of the street and that connect
to a wide range of key destinations throughout the city.

T 3.12

Look for opportunities to reestablish or improve connections across I-5 and
State Highways by creating new crossings, enhancing streets where State
Highways cross overhead, or constructing lids, especially where these can also
enhance opportunities for development or open space, affordable housing, and
neighborhood cohesion.





84

T 3.13

Prioritize bicycle and pedestrian investments on the basis of increasing use, safety,
connectivity, equity, health, livability, and opportunities to leverage funding.

T 3.14

Develop facilities and programs, such as bike sharing, that encourage short trips to
be made by walking or biking.

T 3.15

Develop and implement programs to educate all users of the street on rules of the
road, rights, and responsibilities.

T 3.16

Support and plan for innovation in transportation options and shared mobility,
including car sharing, bike sharing, and transportation network companies, that
can increase travel options, enhance mobility, and provide first- and last-mile
connections for people.

T 3.17

Implement new technologies that will enhance access to transportation and parking
options.

T 3.18

Implement curb-space management strategies such as parking time limits, onstreet parking pricing, loading zones, and residential parking programs to promote
transportation choices, encourage parking turnover, improve customer access, and
provide for efficient allocation of parking among diverse users.

T 3.19

Consider roadway pricing strategies on city arterials to manage demand during
peak travel times, particularly in the Center City.

T 3.20

Consider replacing short-term parking that is displaced by construction or new
transportation projects only when the project results in a concentrated and
substantial amount of on-street parking loss.

T 3.21

Design and manage the transportation system, including on-street parking, so that
people with disabilities have safe and convenient access to their destinations, while
discouraging use of disabled parking permits for commuter use in areas of high
short-term parking demand.

T 3.22

Assess the affordability and accessibility of existing and potential transportation
options in order to better inform decisions affecting the equitable provision of
transportation services.

Transportation Effects on the Environment
Discussion

Transportation policies that encourage use of nonautomobile travel options support not
only the City’s growth strategy but also its environmental goals, including those related to
climate change. Cars, buses, trucks, and other motorized transportation make up Seattle’s
largest source of greenhouse gas emissions, and the City’s Climate Action Plan sets high
standards for reducing greenhouse gas emissions. Using more fuel-efficient transportation
options to move larger numbers of people on well-designed and well-maintained streets is





85

a crucial step to creating a healthy urban environment. By reducing the need for personal
car use, the City can also reduce congestion and provide more opportunities to reallocate
public right-of-way for trees and landscaping. Providing and promoting a wider variety of
transportation options is also integral to achieving these environmental goals.
GOAL
TG 4

Promote healthy communities by providing a transportation system that protects
and improves Seattle’s environmental quality.

POLICIES
T 4.1

Design and operate streets to promote green infrastructure, new technologies, and
active transportation modes while addressing safety, accessibility, and aesthetics.

T 4.2

Enhance the public street tree canopy and landscaping in the street right-of-way.

T 4.3

Reduce drive-alone vehicle trips, vehicle dependence, and vehicle-miles traveled
in order to help meet the City’s greenhouse gas reduction targets and reduce and
mitigate air, water, and noise pollution.

T 4.4

Manage the transportation system to support modes that reduce the use of fossil
fuels and promote the use of alternative fuels.

T 4.5

Encourage the use of electric-powered vehicles and the provision and expansion of
electric-vehicle charging stations.

T 4.6

Improve mobility and access for freight in order to reduce truck idling, improve air
quality, and minimize the impacts of truck parking and movement in residential
areas.

Support a Vibrant Economy
Discussion

The movement of goods and services is critical to economic development in Seattle and the
region. Seattle’s businesses and residents rely on freight routes for safe and timely transportation of goods. Freight carriers depend on a well-functioning network of rail, water, air, and
truck transportation. The City’s Freight Master Plan identifies the city’s overall truck freight
network and prioritizes investments for freight mobility projects. Transportation Figure 8
shows the major truck streets identified by the City. In addition to goods movement, a
well-designed transportation network supports a thriving economy by enhancing access to
jobs, businesses, schools, and recreation. This kind of easy access adds to the vibrancy of
the city’s urban centers and urban villages.





86

Transportation Figure 8
Freight Network

87

GOAL
TG 5

Improve mobility and access for the movement of goods and services to enhance
and promote economic opportunity throughout the city.

POLICIES
T 5.1

Enhance Seattle’s role as the hub for regional goods movement and as a gateway to
national and international suppliers and markets.

T 5.2

Develop a truck freight network in the Freight Master Plan that connects the city’s
manufacturing/industrial centers, enhances freight mobility and operational
efficiencies, and promotes the city’s economic health.

T 5.3

Ensure that freight corridors are designed, maintained, and operated to provide
efficient movement of truck traffic.

T 5.4

Use intelligent transportation system technology to alert motorists, bicyclists,
and pedestrians to the presence and anticipated length of closures due to train
crossings and bridge openings for water vessels.

T 5.5

Evaluate the feasibility of grade separation in locations where train-induced street
closings result in significant delays and safety issues for other traffic, and improve
the safety and operational conditions at rail crossings of city streets.

T 5.6

Work with freight stakeholders and the Port of Seattle to maintain and improve
intermodal freight connections involving Port container terminals, rail yards,
industrial areas, airports, and regional highways.

T 5.7

Support efficient and safe movement of goods by rail where appropriate, and
promote efficient operation of freight rail lines and intermodal yards.

T 5.8

Increase efficient and affordable access to jobs, education, and workforce training in
order to promote economic opportunity.

T 5.9

Improve access to urban villages and other neighborhood business districts for
customers and delivery of goods.

T 5.10

Build great streetscapes and activate public spaces in the right-of-way to promote
economic vitality.

T 5.11

Explore freight demand management strategies that could consolidate freight
delivery trips and encourage vehicles are sized appropriately for an urban
environment.

Safety
Discussion

Safety guides every decision that the Seattle Department of Transportation makes for transportation system operation and design. People expect to feel safe as they use streets, transit





88

facilities, sidewalks, and trails. Collisions involving pedestrians or people riding bicycles are
a relatively small percentage of overall collisions in the city but represent a much higher
percentage of the serious injuries and fatalities in the city. When we invest in protecting our
most vulnerable road users, such as pedestrians and bicyclists, we help build strong communities where residents and visitors are more likely to walk or bike, especially for short
trips. Safer streets are also more efficient streets; they have fewer and less severe collisions,
allowing people and goods to move safely and efficiently. In addition to making safety
improvements, Seattle works to build a culture of mutual awareness between travelers. The
City respects the right of all to travel safely regardless of how they choose to get around.
GOAL
TG 6

Provide and maintain a safe transportation system that protects all travelers,
particularly the most vulnerable users.

POLICIES
T 6.1

Reduce collisions for all modes of transportation and work toward a transportation
system that produces zero fatalities and serious injuries by 2030 to attain the City’s
Vision Zero objectives.

T 6.2

Enhance community safety and livability through measures such as reduced speed
limits, lane rechannelization, and crossing improvements.

T 6.3

Consider lowering speed limits on residential streets and arterials as a way to
reduce collision rates and improve safety.

T 6.4

Minimize right-of-way conflicts to safely accommodate all travelers.

T 6.5

Improve safety for all modes of transportation on streets heavily used by trucks.

T 6.6

Invest in education measures that increase mutual awareness among motorists,
pedestrians, and bicyclists.

T 6.7

Implement innovative and effective measures to improve safety that combine
engineering, education, evaluation, and enforcement.

T 6.8

Make safety a priority in all transportation plans and projects, including project
prioritization criteria.

T 6.9

Use complete street principles, traffic-calming, and neighborhood traffic control
strategies to promote safe neighborhood streets by discouraging cut-through traffic.





89

Connecting to the Region
Discussion

Seattle is the largest employment and cultural center in the Puget Sound region. It is also a
destination for people from all over the area for work, shopping, and recreation. The city is
served by a number of state and regional transportation facilities, including two interstate
highways; several state highways; a regional light rail, commuter rail, and bus system; a ferry
network; waterways; and railroads. While the bulk of the Transportation element addresses
transportation within the city limits, this section provides guidance for larger regional
projects that affect Seattle. It also provides guidance for Seattle’s participation in regional
transportation planning and funding efforts.
GOAL
TG 7

Engage with other agencies to ensure that regional projects and programs affecting
Seattle are consistent with City plans, policies, and priorities.

POLICIES
T 7.1

Coordinate with regional, state, and federal agencies; other local governments; and
transit providers when planning and operating transportation facilities and services
that reach beyond the city’s borders.

T 7.2

Support completion of the freeway high-occupancy-vehicle lane system throughout
the Central Puget Sound region and continued use of that system for promoting
more efficient travel.

T 7.3

Limit freeway capacity expansions intended primarily to accommodate drive-alone
users to allow only spot improvements that enhance safety or remove operational
constraints in specific locations.

T 7.4

Support a strong regional ferry system that maximizes the movement of people,
freight, and goods.

T 7.5

Plan for the city’s truck freight network, developed as part of the Freight Master Plan,
to connect to the state and regional freight network, and to continue providing good
connections to regional industrial and warehouse uses.

T 7.6

Work with regional transit agency partners to expand and optimize cross-jurisdictional
regional light rail and bus transit service investments that function as a single,
coordinated system to encourage more trips to, from, and within Seattle on transit.

T 7.7

Work with regional transit agencies to encourage them to provide service that is
consistent with this Plan’s growth goals and strategy.





90

T 7.8

Support regional transportation pricing and tolling strategies that help manage
regionwide transportation demand.

T 7.9

Work with neighboring jurisdictions and King County to integrate the city’s bicycle
network, developed as part of the Bicycle Master Plan, with regional bicycle
facilities.

Operating and Maintaining the Transportation System
Discussion

Thoughtful operation and maintenance of the transportation system promotes safety,
efficiency, infrastructure preservation, and a high-quality environment. Spending money
on maintaining and preserving the system today can prevent spending more dollars on
replacing parts of the system later. This is particularly true for the more expensive and vital
transportation assets, such as pavement, sidewalks, parking pay stations, intelligent transportation system devices, traffic-signal infrastructure, and bridges.
Since the City makes and maintains its transportation improvements with taxpayer money,
it must spend every dollar wisely and in a way that is consistent with the City’s overall vision.
The City keeps a comprehensive inventory of transportation assets that includes information about the condition of its most valuable assets. The City uses performance measures
to decide whether and when to repair or replace infrastructure. In addition to planning for
future maintenance, the City must address the significant backlog of unmet maintenance
needs that currently exists.
GOAL
TG 8

Maintain and renew existing transportation assets to ensure the long-term viability
of investments, reduce ongoing costs, and promote safe conditions.

POLICIES
T 8.1

Maintain the transportation system to keep it operating and to maximize its useful
life.

T 8.2

Operate the transportation system in a way that balances the following priorities:
safety, mobility, accessibility, social equity, placemaking, infrastructure
preservation, and resident satisfaction.

T 8.3

Employ state-of-the-art intelligent transportation systems to increase efficiency of
movement and reduce travel delays for all modes.





91

T 8.4

Repair transportation facilities before replacement is necessary; replace failed
facilities when replacement is more cost-effective than continuing to repair.

T 8.5

Optimize traffic-signal corridors, taking the needs of all types of transportation into
account.

T 8.6

Designate a heavy haul network for truck freight to provide efficient freight
operations to key port terminals and intermodal freight facilities.

T 8.7

Mitigate construction impacts from City and private projects on the use of the
street right-of-way and on the operation of the transportation system, especially for
vulnerable populations.

T 8.8

Look for innovative ways to create training, youth employment, and living wage
opportunities for marginalized populations in the construction and major
maintenance of transportation facilities.

Measuring Level of Service
Discussion

To accommodate the growth anticipated in this Plan and the increased demands on the
transportation system that come with that growth, the Plan emphasizes strategies to increase travel options. Those travel options are particularly important for connecting urban
centers and urban villages during the most congested times of day. Strategies for increasing
travel options include concentrating development in urban villages well served by transit,
completing the City’s modal plan networks, and reducing drive-alone vehicle use during the
most congested times of day. As discussed earlier in this Transportation element, using the
current street right-of-way as efficiently as possible means encouraging forms of travel other
than driving alone.
In order to help advance this Plan’s vision, the City will measure the level of service (LOS) on
its transportation facilities based on the share of all trips that are made by people driving
alone. That measure focuses on travel that is occurring via the least space-efficient mode.
By shifting travel from drive-alone trips to more efficient modes, Seattle will allow more
people and goods to travel in the same amount of right-of-way. Because buses are the
primary form of transit ridership in the city and buses operate on the arterial system, the
percentage of trips made that are not drive-alone also helps measure how well transit can
move around the city. A more detailed description of the City’s transportation LOS system
can be found in the Transportation Appendix.





92

GOAL
TG 9

Use LOS standards as a gauge to assess the performance of the transportation
system.

POLICIES
T 9.1

Define arterial and transit LOS to be the share of drive-alone trips made during the
late-afternoon peak period (3:00 to 6:00 p.m.).

T 9.2

Provide a menu of transportation-demand management tools for future
development to meet non-drive-alone mode share targets, provision of transit
passes, carpool benefits, and improvements to pedestrian and bicycle facilities.

T 9.3

Pursue strategies to reduce drive-alone trips in order to increase the ability of the
city’s transportation network to carry people and goods.

T 9.4

Assess the mode share LOS standards over time and adjust as needed, based on
review of other City transportation measures.

Funding
Discussion

The city’s transportation network is vital to preserving the quality of life, prosperity, and
health of all Seattleites. Only with adequate funding can Seattle continue to operate, maintain, and improve its transportation network.
In November 2015 Seattle voters approved the Levy to Move Seattle, which replaced the
Bridging the Gap levy that expired at the end of 2015. The Levy to Move Seattle will provide
$930 million for transportation investments between 2016 and 2024 in three main categories: safety, congestion relief, and maintenance and preservation. This funding will help
advance many of the policies in this Plan.
The City also has a commercial parking tax, which supports large capital improvement and
preservation projects. In 2010 the City created the Seattle Transportation Benefit District
(STBD), which has authority to generate revenues from additional sources not otherwise
available to the City. The STBD imposed a twenty-dollar vehicle license fee, which provides
an additional dedicated financial resource for addressing transportation needs. In addition,
Seattle voters approved increased funding for bus transit service in 2014, which adds bus
service to many of the highest-ridership routes in the city.





93

GOAL
TG 10

Ensure that transportation funding is sufficient to operate, maintain, and improve
the transportation system that supports the City’s transportation, land use,
economic, environmental, equity, and other goals.

POLICIES
T 10.1

Maintain and increase dedicated local transportation funding by renewing or
replacing the transportation levy and by maintaining or replacing the existing
commercial parking tax and Seattle Transportation Benefit District.

T 10.2

Work with regional and state partners to encourage a shift to more reliance on user based taxes and fees, and on revenues related to impacts on the transportation
system and the environment.

T 10.3

Leverage local funding resources by securing grants from regional, state, and federal
sources, and through contributions from those who benefit from improvements.

T 10.4

Partner with other City departments, as well as regional transportation and public
works agencies, to coordinate investments, maximize project integration, reduce
improvement costs, and limit construction impacts on neighborhoods.

T 10.5

Make strategic investment decisions consistent with City plans and policies.

T 10.6

Prioritize investment by considering life-cycle costs, safety, environmental benefits,
reduction of greenhouse gas emissions, and public health benefits. Race and social
equity should be a key factor in selecting transportation investments.

T 10.7

Consider use of transportation-impact fees to help fund transportation system
improvements needed to serve growth.

T 10.8

Prepare a six-year Capital Improvement Program (CIP) with projects and programs
that are fully or partially funded.

T 10.9

Develop prioritized lists of projects, consistent with City policies, and actively pursue
funds to implement those projects.

T 10.10

Identify and evaluate possible additional funding resources and/or alternative land
use and transportation scenarios if the level of transportation funding anticipated in
the six-year financial analysis (shown in Transportation Figures 9 and 10) falls short
of the estimated amount.

T 10.11

Explore innovative means of reducing maintenance costs such as converting rightof-way into other uses when appropriate.





94

Transportation Figure 9
Estimated Future Transportation Revenue
Estimated Revenue in Millions (2016–2021)
Source

Low

High

Seattle Transportation Benefit District Funding
(vehicle license fee and sales tax)

$300

$357

Seattle Dedicated Transportation Funding

$833

$858

Grants and Partnerships

$163

$640

General Fund and Cumulative Reserve Fund

$305

$400

Seawall Levy and Waterfront Partnership

$420

$475

Long-Term Financing

$100

$145

$2,120

$2,875

Total

Transportation Figure 10
Estimated Future Transportation Expenditures
Estimated Expenditures in Millions (2016–2021)
Category

Low

High

Operations and Maintenance

$406

$430

Major Maintenance and Safety

$750

$844

Mobility and Enhancements

$964

$1,601

$2,120

$2,875

Total





95

Housing

Introduction
In the City’s vision for the future, all people have access to housing that is safe, clean, and
affordable. As Seattle grows, its housing supply grows and adapts to meet the needs of all
households, regardless of color or income, including families with children, seniors, and
people who have a disability. Our growing city does not force people from their homes;
they are able to stay in their neighborhoods, with their established community resources
and cultural institutions. Throughout the city, quality housing options exist for people of all
backgrounds.
In the wake of the Great Recession, Seattle has experienced unprecedented growth in
the number of housing units due to booming demand. The city added nearly twenty-one
thousand housing units between 2013 and 2015, the highest number in a three-year period
since at least 1980. Rents have increased sharply, particularly impacting lower-income





96

households. Stabilizing housing prices is a key step to stemming growing income inequality,
a threat to the long-term strength of our region’s economy.
Rising housing costs affect marginalized populations the most. Seattle has been shaped
by its history of racial segregation and the economic displacement of communities of
color. Over time, homeowners can gain significant wealth that they can pass down to their
descendants, while renters face the risk of growing housing-cost burden. The result is significant economic disparity along racial lines. Addressing injustices and protecting marginalized populations is a primary focus of the Housing element of this Plan.

Households that spend more
than half of their monthly
income on housing costs are
considered severely housing cost burdened. About 22
percent of households of
color and close to a third of
African American households
are severely housing-cost
burdened.

Share of Seattle Households
Who Are Severely Housing-Cost Burdened
by Race/Ethnicity of Person who Owns or Rents a Home

15%
White alone,
non-Hispanic

31%

22%

18%

Of color

Asian

Broad race/ethnic categories

Black

22%
Hispanic or
Latino, any race

Largest groups of color

Source: 2006–2010 ACS CHAS special tabulation, US Census Bureau

One way the City works to address racial and social equity is by creating and preserving
affordable housing, particularly for lower-income households. Public investments in affordable housing enable people to continue living in their neighborhoods. Creating affordable
housing is also a way to expand housing options in historically unaffordable neighborhoods
that have access to jobs, schools, and transit. As the City develops, evaluates, and implements land use and housing policies and programs, it engages historically underrepresented communities in the process. By collaborating with the larger community on these
projects, the City aims to help reverse known trends of social and racial inequity.
This Housing element establishes goals and policies to address the housing needs of all
Seattleites. Together, these goals and policies will contribute to building vibrant, resilient, and
cohesive communities throughout our city. These goals and policies are grouped within the
following five topic areas: Equal Access to Housing, Supply of Housing, Diversity of Housing,
Housing Construction and Design, and Housing Affordability. The policies of the Housing
element are interdependent with other elements of this Plan, especially the Growth Strategy
element calling for most growth in urban centers and villages, and the Land Use element
guiding the available places in Seattle for residential uses.
Various policies in this element refer to “rent/income-restricted housing.” This means housing with conditions that legally restrict the income of the tenants who live there and the rents





97

they may be charged. When this Plan refers to “affordable housing,” it generally means housing that lower-income households can afford without sacrificing essential needs like food and
health care. Affordable housing includes rent/income-restricted housing, as well as housing
that is low cost without any subsidy or incentive.
The Housing Appendix contains demographic information for the city and an analysis of
housing need, as called for in the King County Countywide Planning Policies.

Equal Access to Housing
Discussion

The federal Fair Housing Act prohibits landlords from discriminating against or in favor
of any individual or group based on race, religion, national origin, sex, color, disability, or
familial status (that is, pregnancy or the presence of children under eighteen). These characteristics are referred to as “protected classes” under the law. The State of Washington and
the City of Seattle have extended protection to additional classes, including marital status,
sexual orientation, gender identity, age, use of Section 8 voucher, political ideology, and veteran or military status. Educating Seattleites about these federal, state, and local fair housing
laws—and enforcing them—is critical to making our city welcoming and inclusive. These
laws increase housing choices for people of all incomes and backgrounds.
The City also supports removing other barriers that prevent families and individuals from
securing housing. For example, the City’s approach to homelessness is to move homeless
people into housing quickly and then provide them services as needed. By focusing on
helping individuals and families quickly move into permanent housing, the City helps the
homeless avoid a costly and lengthy series of steps from emergency shelter to transitional
housing to permanent housing. Social service agencies nationwide have found that without stable housing, it is extremely difficult for someone to tackle problems, including those
related to physical or mental health or addiction, that may have led to that person’s homelessness. Removing barriers to housing reduces homelessness and helps people avoid the
humiliation and vulnerability caused by not having a home.
GOAL
H G1

Provide fair and equal access to housing for all people in Seattle.

POLICIES
H 1.1

Help create a culture where everyone understands and respects the fair housing
rights protected by federal, state, and local laws.





98

H 1.2

Promote a diverse and inclusive city through housing programs that serve lowerincome households.

H 1.3

Work to overcome historical patterns of segregation, promote fair housing choices,
and foster inclusive communities that are free from discrimination through actions,
such as affirmative marketing and fair housing education and enforcement.

H 1.4

Remove barriers that prevent lower-income households from using rental assistance
throughout Seattle, particularly in areas with frequent transit, schools, parks, and
other amenities.

H 1.5

Identify and remove, in coordination with other jurisdictions in the region, potential
barriers to stable housing for individuals and families, such as housing screening
practices that do not align with all applicable federal, state, and local laws in their
use of criminal and civil records and that perpetuate disparate impacts of our
criminal justice system and other institutions.

H 1.6

Work to decrease disparities in homeownership by race and ethnicity.

H 1.7

Support the development and preservation of affordable housing in areas with a
high risk of displacement through tools and actions such as land banking, public
or non-profit acquisition of affordable buildings, and new affordable and mixed income development.

Supply of Housing
Discussion

Seattle is a fast-growing city, and as the population increases, demand for housing will
continue to increase as well. The City is planning for seventy thousand new housing units
by 2035. The majority of new housing is planned for urban centers and villages. These are
the areas where investments in transportation, open space, and services are planned or
have already been made. Record levels of housing development in the last few years have
not been enough to keep up with the demand for housing that is caused by rapid economic growth. That inability of the market to meet demand has contributed to rising rents in
Seattle.
In 2013, The City Council undertook a review of the city’s affordable housing incentive
programs. The Council commissioned reports on national best practices and new strategies
to increase housing affordability in Seattle. In 2014, The Council and Mayor jointly convened
the Seattle Housing Affordability and Livability Agenda (HALA) Advisory Committee. In 2015,
the mayor and Council approved the Seattle Housing Affordability and Livability Agenda
(HALA). The HALA contains sixty-five recommendations for how Seattle can accommodate
more housing. It includes steps that will help both for-profit and nonprofit housing developers build and preserve affordable housing. The HALA outlines a road map to build or





99

preserve fifty thousand housing units over the next ten years, including twenty thousand
units of rent/income-restricted housing.
In 2016, the City published a report titled Growth and Equity. That report compiles data
about several economic and demographic factors that help identify places in the city where
residents, especially people of color and low-income residents, could be at risk of displacement or where there is less access to employment and other opportunities. As housing
development continues, the City will promote policies that limit displacement, stabilize
marginalized populations in their communities, and encourage a net increase in affordable
housing over time.
GOAL
H G2

Help meet current and projected regional housing needs of all economic and
demographic groups by increasing Seattle’s housing supply.

POLICIES
H 2.1

Allow and promote innovative and nontraditional housing design and construction
types to accommodate residential growth.

H 2.2

Identify publicly owned sites suitable for housing and prioritize use of sites, where
appropriate, for rent/income-restricted housing for lower-income households.

H 2.3

Consider Land Use Code and Building Code regulations that allow for flexible
reuse of existing structures in order to maintain or increase housing supply, while
maintaining life-safety standards.

H 2.4

Encourage use of vacant or underdeveloped land for housing and mixed-use
development, and promote turning vacant housing back into safe places to live.

H 2.5

Monitor the supply of housing and encourage the replacement of housing that is
demolished or converted to nonresidential or higher-cost residential use.

H 2.6

Seek to identify affordable housing at risk of demolition and work to mitigate the
displacement of residents ahead of planned upzones.

H 2.7

Evaluate the City’s efforts to mitigate displacement of affordable housing.

Diversity of Housing
Discussion

Seattle needs a greater variety of housing types and a wider spectrum of affordability.
Seattle’s high housing costs are making it increasingly difficult for many households to live





100

in the city. Even middle-income households, especially families with children, struggle to
meet the high prices of housing in most areas of the city. To address these issues, the City
will consider allowing different types of housing than some zoning rules currently permit.
Courtyard housing, row housing, and apartments are examples of potentially affordable
and family-friendly housing options. The policies below encourage a broader array of housing choices in Seattle.
GOAL
H G3

Achieve a mix of housing types that provide opportunity and choice throughout
Seattle for people of various ages, races, ethnicities, and cultural backgrounds and
for a variety of household sizes, types, and incomes.

POLICIES
H 3.1

Identify and implement strategies, including development standards and design
guidelines reflecting unique characteristics of each neighborhood, to accommodate
an array of housing designs that meet the needs of Seattle’s varied households.

H 3.2

Allow and encourage housing for older adults and people with disabilities, including
designs that allow for independent living, various degrees of assisted living, and/
or skilled nursing care, in or near urban centers and urban villages where there is
access to health care and other services and amenities.

H 3.3

Encourage the development of family-sized housing affordable for households with
a broad range of incomes in areas with access to amenities and services.

H 3.4

Promote use of customizable modular designs and other flexible housing
concepts to allow for households’ changing needs, including in areas zoned for
neighborhood residential use.

H 3.5

Allow additional housing types in neighborhood residential areas inside urban
villages; respect general height and bulk development limits currently allowed while
giving households access to transit hubs and the diversity of goods and services that
those areas provide.

Housing Construction and Design
Discussion

High-quality housing design and construction can help protect our natural environment
and resources, prepare for the challenges of climate change, and respond to changing
housing needs over time. All Seattle housing should be safe, resilient, and well maintained.
People generally have a common understanding of what constitutes safe housing. The
Seattle Department of Construction and Inspections (SDCI) enforces codes that protect





101

public health, safety, and general welfare, such as the Building Code and the Housing and
Building Maintenance Code. Now that the majority of housing units in Seattle are rentals,
the SDCI’s rental inspection program is particularly important. In addition to being safe,
homes must be resilient. That is, individuals, households, communities, and regions should
be able to maintain livable conditions in the event of natural disasters, loss of power, or
other interruptions of normally available services.
GOAL
H G4

Achieve healthy, safe, and environmentally sustainable housing that is adaptable to
changing demographic conditions.

POLICIES
H 4.1

Provide programs, regulations, and enforcement to help ensure that all housing is
healthy and safe and meets basic housing-maintenance requirements.

H 4.2

Encourage innovation in residential design, construction, and technology, and
implement regulations to conserve water, energy, and materials; reduce greenhouse
gas emissions; and otherwise limit environmental and health impacts.

H 4.3

Consider providing assistance for seismic retrofit of residential buildings,
particularly those occupied by lower-income households, to reduce the risk of
displacement after an earthquake.

H 4.4

Increase housing opportunities for older adults and people with disabilities by
promoting universal design features for new and renovated housing.

H 4.5

Promote opportunities to combine housing and historic preservation efforts by
rehabilitating structures of historic value for residential use.

H 4.6

Promote access to public decision-making about housing for all Seattleites.

H 4.7

Promote housing for all Seattleites that is safe and free from environmental and
health hazards.

H 4.8

Explore ways to reduce housing development costs.

Housing Affordability
Discussion

Affordable housing for Seattle’s lower-income residents increases their ability to access
opportunities in Seattle and helps reduce existing disparities. Research shows that investing
in affordable housing for lower-income households yields positive social and economic
outcomes, especially for families with children.





102

Washington State’s Growth Management Act (GMA) requires each jurisdiction to include
an inventory and analysis of existing and projected housing needs in its Comprehensive
Plan. King County’s Countywide Planning Policies (CPPs) provide additional direction and
guidance for the inventory and analysis. The report on Seattle’s housing supply and needs is
provided in the Housing Appendix of this Plan.
As of 2015, there were approximately 27,200 units of rent/
income-restricted housing in Seattle. Although this number may seem large, there is still significant need for affordable housing for households at the lowest income levels.
Seattle also currently has some low-cost market-rate rental
housing, although not nearly enough to meet demand.
Higher-income households occupy a portion of this
housing. Roughly a third of units that have rents affordable
to households with income below 80 percent of the area
median income (AMI) are actually rented by households
with higher incomes. That leaves a shortage of rental units
for the households who need them. There would be no
shortage of units for households with incomes between 50
percent and 80 percent of AMI were it not for down-renting
by higher-income households. That is not the case for units
with rents affordable at or below 50 percent of AMI, where
the affordable rental housing shortages far exceed those
caused by down-renting.

AMI (area median income): the annual median income
for families in the Seattle area, as published by the US
Department of Housing and Urban Development, with
adjustments for household size assuming 1 person for
studio units and 1.5 people per bedroom for other units
Lower-income includes the following subcategories:
Extremely low-income: a household whose income is equal to or less than 30 percent of AMI
Very low-income: a household whose income is
greater than 30 percent of AMI and equal to or less
than 60 percent of AMI
Low-income: a household whose income is greater
than 60 percent of AMI and equal to or less than 80
percent of AMI
Moderate-income: a household whose income is
greater than 80 percent of AMI and equal to or less than
100 percent of AMI
Middle-income: a household whose income is greater
than 100 percent of AMI and equal to or less than 150
percent of AMI

The Housing Appendix presents information on renter households in Seattle that have
incomes in three income ranges—0 to 30 percent of AMI, 30 to 50 percent of AMI, and 50 to
80 percent of AMI. The Housing Appendix shows that in the two lowest of the three categories, there are many more households than there are affordable and available rental units.
For instance, households with incomes of 0 to 30 percent of AMI outnumber the affordable
and available units by at least 23,500. Rent/income-restricted housing plays a critical role in
ensuring that low-cost housing actually serves lower-income households.
To meet needs associated with growth, an estimated 27,500 to 36,500 additional housing
units affordable to households with incomes at or below 80 percent of AMI will be needed
by 2035. This includes 10,500 rent/income-restricted housing units for extremely low-income
households.
The City’s housing programs and regulatory strategies will continue to prioritize affordable
housing for extremely low- and very low-income households. These households have the
greatest housing need by far. The City assumes the large majority of units affordable to





103

households with incomes between 60 percent and 80 percent of AMI will continue to be
provided by the market.
Seattle in 2016 is in the midst of a housing affordability crisis. The goals and policies in this
Housing Affordability section help establish a framework for making Seattle a more affordable and equitable city.
GOAL
H G5

Make it possible for households of all income levels to live affordably in Seattle, and
reduce over time the unmet housing needs of lower-income households in Seattle.

POLICIES
H 5.1

Pursue public and private funding sources for housing preservation and production
to provide housing opportunities for lower-wage workers, people with special
needs, and those who are homeless or at risk of being homeless.

H 5.2

Expand programs that preserve or produce affordable housing, preferably long term,
for lower-income households, and continue to prioritize efforts that address the
needs of Seattle’s extremely low-income households.

H 5.3

Promote housing affordable to lower-income households in locations that
help increase access to education, employment, and social opportunities,
while supporting a more inclusive city and reducing displacement from Seattle
neighborhoods or from the city as a whole.

H 5.4

Monitor regularly the supply, diversity, and affordability of housing for households
by income level, and use this information to help evaluate whether changes to
housing strategies and policies are needed to encourage more affordable housing or
to advance racial and social equity.

H 5.5

Collaborate with King County and other jurisdictions in efforts to prevent and
end homelessness and focus those efforts on providing permanent housing and
supportive services and on securing the resources to do so.

H 5.6

Increase housing choice and opportunity for extremely low- and very low-income
households in part by funding rent/income-restricted housing throughout Seattle,
especially in areas where there is a high risk of displacement. Also increase housing
choice in areas where lower-cost housing is less available but where there is high frequency transit service and other amenities, even if greater subsidies may be
needed.

H 5.7

Consider that access to frequent transit may lower the combined housing and
transportation costs for households when locating housing for lower-income
households.

H 5.8

Strive for no net loss of rent/income-restricted housing citywide.





104

H 5.9

Use strategies that will reduce the potential for displacement of marginalized
populations when making decisions related to funding or locating rent/income restricted housing.

H 5.10

Encourage rental-housing owners to preserve, rehabilitate, or redevelop their
properties in ways that limit housing displacement, maintain affordable, healthy,
and safe living conditions for current residents, and consider cultural and economic
needs of the surrounding neighborhood.

H 5.11

Require advance notice to all tenants and payment of relocation assistance to
tenants with household incomes below established thresholds before issuing
permits for housing demolition, change of use, or substantial rehabilitation or
before removing use restrictions from rent/income-restricted housing.

H 5.12

Require culturally sensitive communication with the neighbors of proposed rent/
income-restricted housing for extremely low- and very low-income households, with
the goal of furthering fair housing.

H 5.13

Seek to reduce cost burdens among Seattle households, especially lower-income
households and households of color.

H 5.14

Encourage and advocate for new federal, state, and county laws, regulations,
programs, and incentives that would increase the production and preservation of
lower-income housing.

H 5.15

Encourage a shared responsibility between the private and public sectors for
addressing affordable housing needs.

H 5.16

Consider implementing a broad array of affordable housing strategies in connection
with new development, including but not limited to development regulations,
inclusionary zoning, incentives, property tax exemptions, and permit fee reductions.

H 5.17

Consider using substantive authority available through the State Environmental
Policy Act to require that new development mitigate adverse impacts on housing
affordable for lower-income households.

H 5.18

Consider implementing programs that require affordable housing with new
development, with or without rezones or changes to development standards that
increase development capacity.

H 5.19

Consider requiring provision for housing, including rent/income-restricted housing,
as part of major institution master plans and development agreements when such
plans would lead to housing demolition or employment growth.

H 5.20

Implement strategies and programs to help ensure a range of housing opportunities
affordable for Seattle’s workforce.

H 5.21

Encourage major employers to fund local and regional affordable housing for lower income, moderate-income, and middle-income households.

H 5.22

Continue to promote best practices in use of green building materials, sustainability,
and resiliency in policies for rent/income-restricted housing.





105

H 5.23

Support programs that enable Seattle’s lower-income homeowners to remain safely
and affordably housed.

H 5.24

Support financially sustainable strategies to provide homeownership opportunities
for low-, moderate-, and middle-income households, especially for families
with children, in part to enable these households to have a path toward wealth
accumulation.

H 5.25

Work to mitigate the potential demolition of housing units that are affordable to
low-income households without subsidies.

H 5.26

Explore implementation of models that could provide opportunities for affordable
homeownership, such as community land-trusts, down payment assistance, mixed income housing requirements and limited equity housing co-ops.





106

Capital Facilities

Introduction
Seattle has a comprehensive network of facilities that provide important services to the
city. These are known as capital facilities. Maintaining and expanding them is critical for
providing a high-quality of life as the city grows. These facilities include those owned and
managed by the City, such as police and fire facilities, libraries, neighborhood service centers, City office space, and Seattle Center. Other capital facilities are ones that the City funds
or otherwise supports, such as schools and health clinics. The City encourages non-City
organizations, such as Seattle Public Schools and Public Health—Seattle & King County, to
meet the goals and policies of this Comprehensive Plan. This section generally applies to
buildings, and it does not apply to transportation infrastructure, utility infrastructure, or
affordable-housing projects, which are discussed in other sections of this Plan.
Overall, the City’s network of capital facilities is generally sufficient to accommodate forecasted housing and job growth through 2035. The Capital Facilities Appendix contains





107

information about City-owned facilities, including parks and libraries, as well as information about Seattle Public Schools. Unlike utilities and transportation, demand for capital
facilities is determined largely by factors other than population, such as service areas or
response times. However, the City continues to invest in existing and new facilities to improve the system and ensure that it remains relevant and useful to changing populations.
Over the next twenty years, the City will aim to ensure that Seattle’s capital facilities and
programming
•

contribute to a high degree of personal and public health and safety;

•

are equitably distributed based upon Seattle’s Race and Social Justice principles and the
different needs of individuals and communities;

•

provide services that are relevant to neighborhoods throughout the city and are
consistent with each community’s priorities;

•

support the City’s goals of protecting and restoring the natural environment, in particular
to reduce the impacts of and adapt to climate change;

•

encourage the healthy physical, educational, and cultural development of children and
adults;

•

provide space for the city’s growing population to gather, connect, and build community;

•

respond to increasing diversity, changing technology, and additional demand on limited
facilities; and

•

are resilient to the effects of natural and human-made disasters.

Achieving this vision will enable the City to create a capital facilities system that is an exceptional resource for all Seattleites. Part of the challenge in achieving the vision will be in
recognizing and serving the disparate needs of different portions of the population.
An inventory of existing capital facilities owned by public entities and a forecast of the future needs for such capital facilities are included in the Capital Facilities Appendix. Detailed
information about specific planned capital facility improvements, including the proposed
locations and capacities of expanded or new capital facilities and a six-year plan for financing these improvements, is contained in Seattle’s Capital Improvement Program (CIP),
which is updated as part of the City’s annual budget process.





108

People in different racial and ethnic groups and income segments vary in the extent and ways they use facilities provided
by the City. Community Centers, for example, are used at a
higher rate by residents of color than by other residents.

Percentages of Survey
Respondents in Each Group
Who Visit a Community Center
on a Weekly Basis

Community centers are designed to provide gathering spaces
and recreational opportunities that are both culturally inclusive and affordable regardless of income.
The 2014 Parks Legacy Plan survey indicates that the
Community Centers provided by the City are an especially
important resource for persons of color. A greater share of
respondents of color than whites said they visited a community center on a weekly basis.

18%
8%

People of Color

White People

Source: September 2014 Parks Legacy Plan survey.

Strategic Investment
Discussion

The City has limited physical and financial resources available to maintain and improve our
capital facilities network. The investment decisions we make will have long-term implications for our ability to serve a changing population. Consequently, Seattle must be strategic
about investing these resources. This section describes the overarching goals and policies
that apply to all aspects of capital facility development and management. These considerations will guide our actions through all aspects of working with capital facilities, including
maintenance, acquisition, design, construction, and service-provision operations.
GOAL
CF G1

Develop and manage capital facilities to provide long-term environmental,
economic, social, and health benefits for all residents and communities when using
public investments, land, and facilities.

POLICIES
CF 1.1

Assess the policy and fiscal implications of potential major capital facility
investments as part of the City’s capital decision-making process. The evaluation
should include consideration of a capital project’s
•

consistency with the Comprehensive Plan and functional plans;





109

•

effects on Seattle’s environmental, social, economic, and human health over
the lifetime of the investment;

•

contributions to an equitable distribution of facilities and services especially
to correct historic under-investment in low-income areas;

•

ability to support urban centers and villages that are experiencing or
expecting high levels of residential and employment growth or those with
lower access to the benefits of City-sponsored capital facilities; and

•

total costs of ownership over a project’s life, including construction,
operation, maintenance, and decommissioning.

CF 1.2

Prioritize the maintenance of existing facilities, making efficient use of limited
financial and physical resources.

CF 1.3

Provide capital facilities that are models of environmental, economic, and social
stewardship and that serve as examples for private development.

CF 1.4

Provide capital facilities, such as libraries and community centers, that will keep
Seattle attractive to families with children.

CF 1.5

Encourage the protection, enhancement, and adaptive reuse of City-owned historic
facilities.

CF 1.6

Develop resilient capital facilities by considering the potential impacts of changing
demographics, conditions, and events—such as climate change, technological
changes, and natural and human-made disasters—in planning and investment
decisions.

CF 1.7

Structure user fees and scholarships to mitigate disproportionate cost burdens on
low-income households.

CF 1.8

Leverage investments to create training and living wage job opportunities,
particularly for marginalized populations and local residents.

CF 1.9

Continue to invest in Seattle Public Library programs and resources so that they
remain free and open to all.

Facility Operations and Maintenance
Discussion

Seattle has already made substantial investments in developing existing facilities. For this
reason, the operation and maintenance of the facilities we already have is key to making
efficient use of resources. This section applies to daily operations and monitoring of these
facilities, as well as minor improvements to them.





110

GOAL
CF G2

Reduce ongoing resource consumption and day-to-day costs of the City’s capital
facilities, and protect their long-term viability, while serving the needs of the people
who use them.

POLICIES
CF 2.1

Use maintenance plans for capital facilities to make efficient use of limited financial
and physical resources.

CF 2.2

Manage existing facilities with a resource-conservation approach and the specific
aim of continuously reducing energy use, water use, and stormwater impacts, as
well as lowering utility costs.

CF 2.3

Seek to achieve 20 percent energy savings from a 2008 baseline across the City’s
portfolio of buildings by 2020 and to achieve carbon neutrality by 2050.

CF 2.4

Manage existing facilities to maintain healthy environments for occupants and
users.

Facility Siting
Discussion

When the City builds new capital facilities, it’s making substantial long-term investments.
These are facilities that should serve the city for many decades to come. The location of
these facilities can have major impacts on the long-term cost of providing services. They
must be thoughtfully placed in order to provide the most benefits for local communities. As
a result, Seattle must consider a wide range of questions in making these decisions. How
will potential locations impact the efficiency of operations? Will services be provided equitably to all members of the community? What are the environmental consequences of each
location, and how will they affect our ability to serve a growing population?
GOAL
CF G3

Locate capital facilities to achieve efficient citywide delivery of services, support an
equitable distribution of services, minimize environmental impacts, and maximize
facilities’ value to the communities in which they are located.

POLICIES
CF 3.1

Encourage the location of new capital facilities in urban centers and villages to
support future growth and attract both public and private investments.





111

CF 3.2

Encourage the location of new capital facilities where they would support equitable
distribution of services and address the needs of marginalized communities.

CF 3.3

Locate capital facilities so that the majority of expected users can reach them by
walking, bicycling, and/or taking public transit.

CF 3.4

Seek to avoid siting new facilities in areas known to be prone to the effects of
natural or human-made hazards, such as earthquake liquefaction–prone areas.

CF 3.5

Encourage the joint use, reuse, and repurposing of existing City-owned land and
buildings to further the City’s long-range goals.

CF 3.6

Consider future climate conditions during siting, particularly sea level, to help
ensure capital facilities function as intended over their planned life cycle.

CF 3.7

Consider alternate service delivery models that may be more resource efficient or
that could better reach marginalized communities.

Facility Design and Construction
Discussion

As with location, the design and construction of capital facilities have a profound impact on
how they are able to serve the city. The way the facilities are built affects the long-term cost
of the services they provide, how well they serve the community, and their environmental
impacts. By considering a range of perspectives, the City can design and build facilities that
better suit the needs of Seattleites, now and in the future. The following policies address
design and construction of the City’s capital facilities, including major improvements and
rehabilitation to existing facilities.
GOAL
CF G4

Design and construct capital facilities so that they are considered assets to
their communities and act as models of environmental, economic, and social
stewardship.

POLICIES
CF 4.1

Seek to make all capital facilities accessible and relevant to people of all abilities,
socioeconomic backgrounds, ages, and cultures.

CF 4.2

Strive for high levels of energy and water efficiency in City-owned facilities.

CF 4.3

Use materials efficiently, prioritize local and environmentally preferable products,
and minimize waste.





112

CF 4.4

Create healthy indoor and outdoor environments for both users and occupants.

CF 4.5

Provide building-design strategies that promote active living through the placement
and design of stairs, elevators, and indoor and outdoor spaces.

CF 4.6

Encourage a wide range of transportation options by promoting car sharing and
by providing bicycle, transit, and electric-car charging facilities for visitors to City
facilities.

CF 4.7

Consider future climate conditions during design, including changes in temperature,
precipitation, and sea level, to help ensure capital facilities function as intended
over their planned life cycle.

CF 4.8

Seek to mitigate impacts of City projects on adjacent communities, especially
lower-income residents and small locally-owned businesses, in order to reduce the
possibility of displacement.

Non-City Service Providers
Discussion

In addition to directly providing services through its own capital facilities, the City works
with other entities that serve Seattle. These include Seattle Public Schools, Public Health—
Seattle & King County, Washington State, and King County, as well as other jurisdictions and
nonprofit organizations. Working together—for instance, through joint planning, funding
other service providers, and allowing other groups to use City-owned property—we can
better provide services to Seattle’s residents.
GOAL
CF G5

Make efficient use of resources when investing in facilities and service delivery that
involve other agencies and organizations.

POLICIES
CF 5.1

Collaborate with other public and nonprofit organizations to include location
within urban villages as a major criterion for selecting sites for new or expanded
community-based facilities or public amenities.

CF 5.2

Work with other public or nonprofit agencies to identify and pursue new co-location,
joint-use and temporary use opportunities in public facilities for community
programs, services, performances, exhibits and meetings.

CF 5.3

Partner with Seattle Public Schools to plan for expected growth in student
population, explore opportunities to reduce the costs of developing new schools,





113

encourage the siting of new school facilities in or near urban centers and villages,
and make it easy for students and families to walk and bike to school.
CF 5.4

Join with other jurisdictions in King, Snohomish, and Pierce Counties to explore
regional funding strategies for capital facilities, especially those that serve or benefit
citizens throughout the region.

CF 5.5

Use nontraditional strategies for service delivery, such as the leasing of City-owned
buildings or funding of non-City facilities, where they would provide greater benefit
to the city.





114

Utilities

Introduction
Utilities are basic services that keep the city working. As a highly urbanized area, Seattle has
a fully developed and comprehensive utility infrastructure system. This system provides
energy, drinking water, water for fire suppression, drainage, sewers, solid waste management, and communications services throughout the city. These services are managed by
different public and private providers that must share space within the city’s street right-ofway. Seattle City Light provides electricity throughout the city and beyond the city boundaries. Seattle Public Utilities provides drinking water, drainage and sewer systems, and solid
waste services within the city limits. In addition, it provides water service directly or indirectly to much of King County. King County provides combined drainage and sewer services in
portions of Seattle and is responsible for treating all wastewater generated in the city. The
City’s Department of Information Technology maintains an extensive data and fiber optic
network. It shares conduit installation and maintenance with multiple partners, and leases
excess fiber capacity to private providers.





115

Privately owned utility companies also serve Seattle. These provide natural gas, district
steam, and communications infrastructure and services. Additionally, various companies
operate wireless communications facilities such as television, radio, and cellular phone
towers and antennas. As the regulator of the public right-of-way, the City has limited control
of private utilities. However, its agreements with cable companies do help ensure technical
quality, protect customer rights, and support public services.
As Seattle continues to grow over the coming years, the existing utilities infrastructure is
well poised to accommodate new buildings, although some development strategies and
construction modifications may be required to bring services to individual lots. With proper
maintenance and strategic planning, the existing infrastructure will also be able to support
this Plan’s broader goals of sustainability, economic efficiency, and equitable service access
for all Seattleites. The Utilities Appendix contains information about the Seattle City Light
and Seattle Public Utilities systems, as well as about privately owned utilities providing
natural gas, district steam, and other energy, and communications services.
The utilities system will need to address historic conditions and respond to changing needs,
technologies, and other factors in order to thrive over the next twenty years. The electrical
system will have to increase capacity and become more reliable in order to adapt to emerging technologies such as local solar energy production and electric vehicles, while continuing to address climate change and maintaining a significant distribution system. The drinking water, drainage, and sewer systems will have to respond to new goals and regulatory
mandates for water quality, as well as prepare for the impacts of a changing climate. At the
same time, the drainage and wastewater utilities need to make updates to older systems
that have produced combined sewer overflows and degraded creeks. The communications
systems will need to grow to continue to address City, business, resident, education, health,
service sector, and mobile communication needs.
Future investments will need to help the City address race and social equity. Seattle must
ensure that the burdens and benefits of high-quality utilities infrastructure are distributed
equitably throughout the city. Future infrastructure investments should help rectify existing
environmental and service disparities while supporting the health and economic opportunity of underinvested communities. These areas of the city are disproportionately impacted
by environmental contaminants or lack of service such as high-speed Internet availability.





116

A City survey shows disparities in access
by race and ethnicity, with Hispanic or
Latino households the least likely to
have access to the Internet. Considering
the importance of the Internet for
receiving information, conducting
business, and looking for work, having access to it is critical for people to
participate in the economic life of the
community.

Percentage of Seattle Households
without Internet Access at Home

21%

25%

22%
13%

African
American

Asian/Pacific
Islander

Caucasian

Hispanic/
Latino

Source: Community Technology Survey 2015

The Utilities element of this Plan outlines goals and policies that will guide City decisions
about providing and updating services. It also addresses emerging issues that utilities face.
Seattle City Light and Seattle Public Utilities periodically prepare strategic plans that guide
the work of the utilities consistent with this Plan. An inventory of existing infrastructure as
well as the forecasted future needs for City-owned utilities are discussed in this element’s
appendix. The capital programs planned over the next six years are included in the City’s
most recently adopted Capital Improvement Program (CIP). Though this element focuses
on how the City operates its own utilities, it also discusses how the City influences non-City
utilities, such as communications, natural gas, and district steam.

Service Delivery
Discussion

Utilities providers must plan strategically to invest in maintaining and improving service
delivery within finite physical and financial resources. Decisions we make today will have
long-term implications for our ability to serve a changing population. This section describes
the overarching goals and policies that apply to all aspects of service delivery.
GOAL
U G1

Provide safe, reliable, and affordable utility services that are consistent with
the City’s aims of environmental stewardship, race and social equity, economic
opportunity, and the protection of public health.





117

POLICIES
U 1.1

Provide equitable levels of service by accounting for existing community conditions,
considering how decisions will impact varied geographic and socioeconomic
groups, and making service equity a criterion in decision-making.

U 1.2

Coordinate planning, programs, and projects for City utilities with those of other
City departments to lower costs, improve outcomes, and limit construction and
operational impacts.

U 1.3

Strive to develop a resilient utility system where planning and investment decisions
account for changing conditions, such as climate change, fluctuations in demand,
technological changes, increased solar energy generation, and natural disasters.

U 1.4

Support innovative approaches to service delivery, such as the development of
distributed systems or joint ventures by City and non-City utilities, where they could
further overall goals for utilities.

U 1.5

Ensure that new private development provides adequate investments to maintain
established utility service standards.

U 1.6

Make utility services as affordable as possible through equitable delivery of utility
discount programs and incentives.

U 1.7

Leverage investments and agreements with private utilities and vendors to create
training and living wage job opportunities, particularly for low-income and local
residents.

U 1.8

Support asset-management programs for the renewal and replacement of utility
infrastructure.

Utility Resource Management
Discussion

Natural resources such as water, fuel, and materials, as well as hydropower capacity, are the
basic inputs and outputs of the City’s utilities. Issues related to energy supply, water supply
and disposal, and waste management are essentially about how these resources are used,
changed, and released. While the City has adequate existing capacity to provide electricity, drinking water, and waste disposal over the next twenty years, proper stewardship of
these resources is vitally important for meeting the utilities’ key goals. These goals include
reducing impacts on the environment and preparing for climate change and a growing
population.
This section describes how the utility providers manage energy supply, water supply and
disposal, and materials to make the most effective use of these resources.





118

GOAL
U G2

Conserve potable water, electricity, and material resources through the actions of
the utilities and their customers.

POLICIES
U 2.1

Use cost-effective demand management to meet the City’s utility resource needs,
and support such practices by wholesale customers of City utilities.

U 2.2

Consider short-term and long-term environmental and race and social equity
impacts related to acquiring and using natural resources.

U 2.3

Remain carbon neutral in the generation of electricity by relying first on energy
efficiency, second on renewable resources, and third, when fossil fuel use is
necessary, on offsetting the release of greenhouse gases.

U 2.4

Strive to be carbon neutral in the delivery of drinking water, drainage, sewer, and
solid waste services, both directly and through partnerships with private utilities
and vendors.

U 2.5

Pursue the long-term goal of diverting most of the city’s solid waste away from
landfills by increasing recycling, composting, and promoting products that are
made to be reused, repaired, or recycled back into nature or the marketplace.

U 2.6

Prevent pollutants and high water flows from damaging aquatic systems by
preserving native vegetation, limiting impervious surfaces and stormwater runoff,
reducing contamination of street runoff and stormwater, addressing combined
sewer overflows, and minimizing illegal discharges into water bodies.

U 2.7

Provide opportunities for marginalized populations to participate in conservation
programs provided by the City’s utilities and through partnerships with private
utilities and vendors.

U 2.8

Monitor waste reduction programs and develop new strategies when goals are not
being met.

Utility Facility Siting and Design
Discussion

New substations, reservoirs, pump stations, green stormwater facilities, treatment facilities,
and other utility infrastructure represent substantial long-term investments. As capacity
increases and demand changes throughout the city, Seattle may need to add new utility
facilities. Since the location and design of these facilities can have major impacts on their
long-term cost and effectiveness, we must consider a wide range of perspectives in making
these decisions. For example, siting and design decisions may impact efficiency, equity of





119

service provision, environmental outcomes, and our ability to serve a growing population.
We must also take existing conditions into account, such as the historical concentration of
large polluting industries and utility operations in areas that also house low-income, racially
diverse communities. By considering a range of desired outcomes for new facilities, the City
can also design facilities that meet a broad range of utility goals.
The following policies address the location and design of Seattle’s utility facilities.
GOAL
U G3

Site and design facilities so that they help to efficiently and equitably provide
services to all Seattleites and provide value to the communities where they are
located.

POLICIES
U 3.1

Consider and budget for the potential operation and maintenance costs of new
facilities when developing them.

U 3.2

Discourage siting and design alternatives that may increase negative impacts, such
as traffic, noise, and pollution, particularly in communities that already bear a
disproportionate amount of these impacts.

U 3.3

Apply consistent and equitable standards for the provision of community and
customer amenities when they are needed to offset the impact of construction
projects, ongoing operations, and facility maintenance practices.

U 3.4

Build facilities that are models of environmental stewardship by including high
levels of energy, water, and material efficiency, effectively managing stormwater onsite, prioritizing local and environmentally preferable products, and limiting waste.

U 3.5

Consider opportunities for collocating facilities, allowing mixed-use development,
or creating accessible open space when siting and designing utility facilities,
provided doing so would still allow for safe and secure utility operations.

U 3.6

Consider future climate conditions during siting and design, including changes
to temperature, rainfall, and sea level, to help ensure capital facilities function
properly as intended over their planned life cycle.

U 3.7

Consider and address the disproportionate impacts of climate change on
communities of color and lower-income communities when prioritizing projects.





120

Coordination within the Right-of-Way
Discussion

Above, below, and on the ground, Seattle’s roads, paths, and other right-of-way spaces contain a vast array of utility infrastructure. Pipes, conduits, wires, poles, service vaults, storage
tanks, pollution-control structures, streetlights, gutters, swales, and infiltration facilities are
carefully integrated into the city’s overall landscape. Due to limited space, however, the way
these facilities are placed and maintained must be carefully managed. The City must work
to minimize conflicts between the utilities and other uses of the right-of-way, as well as to
make sure that infrastructure investments are well maintained.
At the same time, new investments in these facilities—particularly projects that result in
opening the pavement—also provide opportunities to improve a variety of existing facilities
and meet multiple objectives. Consequently, the City should look for opportunities to share
costs, undertake joint projects, or otherwise consider the goals of other departments when
undertaking projects in the right-of-way.
GOAL
U G4

Coordinate right-of-way activities among departments to meet transmission,
distribution, and conveyance goals; to minimize the costs of infrastructure
investment and maintenance; to manage stormwater; and to support other uses
such as transportation, trees, and public space.

POLICIES
U 4.1

Engage departments in early coordination and collaboration on transportation
and utility projects in the right-of-way to avoid space conflicts, identify joint project
opportunities, and minimize life-cycle costs across all City departments.

U 4.2

Coordinate construction to limit cost and public inconvenience caused by road and
right-of-way disruption.

Non-City Utilities
Discussion

There are a few ways the City generally works with non-City utilities, such as natural gas, district steam, and communications providers. The City reviews street use permits, coordinates
projects, creates development and leasing policies, and executes franchise agreements or





121

programmatic term permits. These relationships offer opportunities to improve service provision for customers, reduce the impacts of construction, and encourage non-City utilities to
work toward City goals. Specific policies about the location of communications facilities are
included in the Land Use element. The following policies address the operation of non-City
utilities in Seattle generally.
GOAL
U G5

Work with non-City utilities to promote the City’s overall goals for utility service and
coordinated construction within the right-of-way.

POLICIES
U 5.1

Provide affected non-City utilities with timely and effective notices of planned road
and right-of-way trenching, maintenance, and upgrade activities.

U 5.2

Support competition among private providers by giving equitable access to the
right-of-way for all data and telecommunications service providers to reach their
customers.

U 5.3

Encourage improvements in the communications system to achieve the following:
•

Universal and affordable access for residents, businesses, and institutions
within Seattle, particularly for marginalized populations

•

Customer options and competitive pricing

•

Consumer privacy, system security, and reliability

•

State-of-the-art services





122

Economic Development

Introduction
Seattle is the vital center of the Puget Sound economy and is a leading West Coast hub.
Over the past fifty years, Seattle’s economy has successfully transitioned its focus from timber, shipping, aerospace, and the military to more diverse sources that reflect traditional industry, emerging technology, and innovation-driven sectors. After a challenging decade that
included the Nisqually earthquake, impacts from September 11, and the Great Recession,
Seattle’s economy recovered more quickly than that of many other cities. By 2013, Seattle
had regained the 35,000 jobs lost during the recession, pushing unemployment below 5
percent for the first time since 2008. The highest job growth occurred in the services sector.
Although the number of jobs in the city’s two manufacturing/industrial centers has shrunk,
they still account for 16 percent of all jobs in the city.
The City is anticipating an additional 115,000 jobs over the next twenty years. The urban
village strategy identifies the geographic areas best suited for job growth—urban centers,
urban villages, and manufacturing/industrial centers. Some businesses and jobs are





123

best suited to the mixed-use, walkable urban centers and villages. Others require unique
features, services, and targeted land uses that fit best in manufacturing/industrial centers.
Seattle must balance these varied demands in order to sustain existing businesses while
also anticipating the needs of emerging businesses and industries.
The purpose of the Economic Development element of this Plan is to provide direction
about how to maintain and grow Seattle’s vibrant, diverse, and increasingly global economy to benefit individuals across income levels, as well as business, industry, and the city’s
diverse communities. As Seattle grows, the City will strive to reduce income inequities and
to identify and address policies that contribute to or create inequity.
Seattle is an attractive place to live, giving it a competitive advantage. Seattle’s beautiful
physical setting, thriving cultural scene, walkable neighborhoods, diverse restaurants,
unique shopping, access to nature, and historic locations generate direct economic benefits
to residents. These attributes also contribute to the high-quality of life that draws businesses,
people, and tourists to the city. Seattle also benefits from the way leaders from public and
private sectors work together to encourage innovation and to support business formation,
retention, and expansion.
However, not all residents have shared in Seattle’s economic prosperity. Communities of
color, for example, have higher rates of unemployment, lower incomes, and less education
when compared to the city as a whole. Unemployment rates in Seattle have remained higher for people of color than for whites in the wake of the Great Recession. The 2011 to 2013
American Community Survey found that close to 14 percent of African American residents in
Seattle were unemployed during that time span. This is over twice the unemployment rate
for whites. More recent data shows lower overall unemployment in Seattle, and national
statistics show that unemployment among African Americans is also declining. However,
current data about African American unemployment in Seattle is not available.
Widening gaps in income and opportunity hurt Seattle’s
future prospects. Closing these gaps will require, among
other things, more training and education for the city’s
marginalized populations. Improving education and
job skills within these communities will reduce the need
to import workers from elsewhere. Community-led economic development in underinvested neighborhoods
can spur small-business start-up and growth. It can also
provide economic opportunities for current resident,
immigrant, and refugee entrepreneurs. Shared prosperity is not just about what low-income communities
need—it is about what they can contribute.

Unemployment Rates for Seattle
Residents Age 16 and Over

14%
7%

5%
White

Black

9%

Asian

Hispanic or
Latino (of
any race)
Source: 2011–2013 ACS, US Census Bureau

The Land Use Appendix shows the number of jobs in each urban center and urban village.





124

Commercial Districts
Discussion

Seattle enjoys an attractive, flourishing Downtown core that houses about 30 percent of all
jobs within the city. Outside of Downtown, a network of long-standing, distinctive, walkable
places (known as hub urban villages and residential urban villages) exists. This is where
small businesses thrive, communities come together, and many local jobs are created.
About 12 percent of Seattle’s jobs are located in these areas. The Equitable Development
Implementation Plan is one of the tools that the City is using to implement the policies in
this section.
GOAL
ED G1

Encourage vibrant commercial districts in urban centers and villages.

POLICIES
ED 1.1

Enhance the Downtown core as the economic center of the city and the region, and
strengthen its appeal as home to many of Seattle’s vital professional service firms,
high technology companies, and regional retailers, as well as cultural, historic,
entertainment, convention, and tourist facilities.

ED 1.2

Promote a comprehensive approach to strengthening neighborhood business
districts through organization; marketing; business and retail development; and
clean, safe, walkable, and attractive environments.

ED 1.3

Prioritize assistance to commercial districts in areas of lower economic opportunity
with high concentrations of small locally-owned businesses..

ED 1.4

Enrich the vibrancy of neighborhood business districts through the integration
of design, public art, public space, historic preservation, small locally-owned
businesses and cultural spaces and programming.

ED 1.5

Support small locally-owned businesses in commercial districts to reinforce local
neighborhood and cultural identity and strengthen the local economy.

ED 1.6

Pursue strategies for community development that help meet the needs of
marginalized populations in multicultural business districts, to reinforce local
neighborhood and cultural identity by preserving small locally-owned businesses
that are at risk of displacement due to increasing costs.

ED 1.7

Seek new tools to support the creation of spaces attractive and affordable to
businesses threatened with displacement so that small locally-owned businesses
are able to remain in their neighborhoods.





125

ED 1.8

Support formation of Business Improvement Areas to help provide clean and safe
services, marketing and promotion, business and economic development planning,
community appearance and pedestrian environment, urban design, advocacy, and
organizational development/administration in commercial districts.

Industry Clusters
Discussion

Seattle’s best prospects for future economic growth are in its key “industry clusters”—concentrated networks of interdependent firms in a defined geographic area that share common markets, technologies, and a need for skilled workers. Examples of Seattle’s industry
clusters include manufacturing, maritime, biotech and life sciences, global health and
health care, clean technology, information technology, tourism, and film and music.
These clusters certainly help the associated businesses, which benefit from the rapid exchange of information, leading to innovative and efficient operations. The clusters are also
an asset to the overall economy. Generally, businesses in industry clusters pay higher than
average wages, bring new capital into the economy, are environmentally minded, and add
variety to the economic base. By identifying key sectors of the economy in which Seattle has
a competitive advantage, the City can better shape industry clusters and help achieve a vibrant, balanced, and diversified economy that benefits individuals across all income levels.
GOAL
ED G2

Enhance strategic industry clusters that build on Seattle’s competitive advantages.

POLICIES
ED 2.1

Improve linkages between industry clusters and research institutions, hospitals,
educational institutions, and other technology-based businesses.

ED 2.2

Encourage collaboration among businesses within and across industry clusters in
the areas of marketing, research, capital and talent acquisition, job training, and
expansion of highly skilled jobs.

ED 2.3

Improve the ability of industry clusters to transfer technology in cooperation with
other jurisdictions and with major education and research institutions.

ED 2.4

Encourage industry clusters to have workforces that are representative of Seattle’s
racial and socioeconomic groups.





126

ED 2.5

Promote coordination of economic development and community development
among City departments, as well as with all levels of government, the business
community, and nonprofits, to strengthen industry clusters.

ED 2.6

Seek to identify and support innovative small locally-owned businesses that could
form new industry clusters.

Business Climate
Discussion

A city’s business climate is determined by how well it attracts and sustains businesses. The
external factors that shape this climate include quality of the workforce, taxes, regulations,
incentives, and other government policies and investments, as well as overall quality of life
in the city. Seattle is renowned for its mild climate, extraordinary access to recreation and
natural resources, and diverse cultural offerings. Seattle’s collaborative culture is another
economic advantage. However, some aspects of Seattle’s business climate pose challenges
for business, such as complex development regulations, earthquake risk, and underfunded
transportation and education systems.
GOAL
ED G3

Encourage a business climate that supports new investment, job creation, and
resilience and that values cultural diversity and inclusion.

POLICIES
ED 3.1

Promote the expansion of international trade within Seattle and throughout the
region.

ED 3.2

Strive to make the business climate more competitive through use of transparent
and predictable regulations, efficient approval processes, and reasonable taxes,
fees, and utility rates.

ED 3.3

Foster partnerships between the public and private sectors to improve business
climate.

ED 3.4

Improve coordination of information and services between city, county, regional,
state, and federal agencies to develop and implement economic-development
policies and programs.

ED 3.5

Address the needs of culturally relevant businesses most vulnerable to
redevelopment pressure and displacement.

ED 3.6

Consider the needs and priorities for long-term economic recovery in postdisaster
recovery and mitigation planning.





127

ED 3.7

Evaluate taxes, regulations, incentives, and other government policies and
investments to determine the benefits and burdens for marginalized populations.

ED 3.8

Recognize and maintain a high-quality of life for all residents as one of Seattle’s
competitive advantages.

ED 3.9

Support the retention and growth of the industrial sector, retain existing businesses
and small firms, and actively seek to attract new industrial businesses.

Workforce
Discussion

The success of industry clusters depends on a skilled and competitive workforce. However,
many employers have noted a lack of qualified job applicants for some positions in Seattle.
This includes a variety of industries that have been unable to find enough local college
graduates to fill jobs in certain engineering, computer, and life science fields, as well as
traditional industries looking to replace an aging highly skilled workforce. As a result, many
employers look to attract talent from elsewhere. Better education and training of local
workers can connect displaced workers, disadvantaged youth, and recent immigrants to
highly skilled job opportunities.
GOAL
ED G4

Maintain a highly trained and well-educated local workforce that effectively
competes for meaningful and productive employment, earns a living wage, meets
the needs of business, and increases opportunities for social mobility.

POLICIES
ED 4.1

Create a coalition of business, labor, civic and social service agencies, libraries,
and educational institutions that can develop and expand education and training
programs targeted to the needs of business, especially for high-demand science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics skills.

ED 4.2

Increase job training, internships, and job placement to overcome barriers to
employment and to achieve greater racial and social inclusion in the workforce.

ED 4.3

Encourage all businesses to pay a living wage, provide necessary employment
benefits, and train and hire local residents so that the existing workforce can share
in the city’s prosperity.

ED 4.4

Explore opportunities to coordinate community-development activities with
place-based workforce-development opportunities in communities with high
unemployment.





128

ED 4.5

Promote programs aimed at reducing unemployment among people of color in
Seattle.

ED 4.6

Support efforts that connect youth to internships and other education and career
opportunities.

ED 4.7

Support efforts to provide training and job placement for older workers and others
who may have unique challenges finding employment.

ED 4.8

Work with the local community in areas with low access to opportunities to provide
training and education opportunities such as culturally relevant early learning
training, community college centers and food industry training.

Entrepreneurial and Small Business
Development
Discussion

Our city is home to major national companies such as Trident Seafoods, Filson, Cascade
Designs, Starbucks, Amazon, Tableau, and Nordstrom, to name a few. However, most
Seattle businesses are much smaller and have fewer than ten employees. Sectors with an
especially high proportion of small businesses include construction, wholesale trade, manufacturing, retail and related services, and increasingly, start-ups in technology and other
creative industries. In addition, food growers, processors, and distributors are a quickly
expanding presence within the local economy.
As technological advances continue to lower the cost of starting new businesses, the rate
of new entrepreneurs will rise. In addition to attracting new types of businesses, we must
redouble our efforts to retain the small, culturally diverse businesses that support equally
diverse communities.
GOAL
ED G5

Strengthen the entrepreneurial environment for start-ups and small businesses.

POLICIES
ED 5.1

Encourage institutions of higher education toward commercialization of research
innovations to fuel the growth of start-ups.





129

ED 5.2

Enhance arts and culture activities in order to attract creative-class workers, living
wage employers, and tourists to Seattle, as well as to enrich our overall culture of
innovation.

ED 5.3

Expand the network for technology and innovation entrepreneurs to learn about
services and jobs, build relationships, and find resources—all of which will help
enable their businesses to flourish.

ED 5.4

Establish incentives to encourage property owners and building owners to offer
affordable spaces for start-ups and small businesses.

ED 5.5

Reduce barriers to business start-up and entrepreneurship, especially barriers that
confront marginalized populations, immigrants, and refugees.

ED 5.6

Promote the growth of local small businesses.





130

Environment

Introduction
Choices the City makes about how to grow and operate deeply affect the health and sustainability of our natural environment. Over the next twenty years, the City has an amazing
opportunity to act to protect the climate and restore the natural environment. We can
improve human health, make vibrant green spaces, create habitat for wildlife, generate jobs,
and reduce the burdens on the environment. As a city of outstanding creativity and appreciation of the natural environment, Seattle can set an example that inspires others and leads
to improvements beyond the City’s actions by demonstrating what a strong, climate-friendly economy can look like. The City can make investments to restore green spaces and creeks
and develop a twenty-first-century transportation system that integrates old (walking,
biking, cars) and new (light rail, car sharing) approaches. Measures like these can help a
growing region accommodate people and jobs in urban areas, create livable communities,
and reduce the impacts of sprawl.





131

34.7–58.8
58.9–96.1
96.2–253.8
Source: Public Health – Seattle & King County:
Seattle is committed to understanding how its decisions impact different
individuals
and Indicators Project.
Community
Health
communities. To fulfill its vision for race and social equity, the City must ensure that environmental benefits are equitably distributed and burdens are minimized and equitably
shared.

Exposure to indoor and outdoor pollutants increases the risks of hospitalization
for people with asthma. There are large
racial, income, and geographic disparities
in the hospitalization rates for asthma.
Within Seattle, Beacon Hill, Southeast
Seattle, Downtown, and the Central Area
have the highest rates of hospitalization
for asthma, and these are among the
highest rates in King County.

Adult Asthma Hospitalizations
by Zip Code 2008 to 2012
Average Annual Rate per 100,000 Adults
0.0–12.2
12.3–34.6
34.7–58.8
58.9–96.1
96.2–253.8
Source: Public Health – Seattle & King County:
Community Health Indicators Project.

The City is actively working to reduce future greenhouse gas emissions. But because of past
emissions we know that some amount of climate change is now inevitable. The City must
learn to understand and adapt to these changes.
This element of the Plan contains goals and policies that are relevant to all other elements
of this Plan. And other elements also touch on environmental policies specific to those
topics. For example, the Plan’s Land Use element considers policies that regulate development near environmentally critical areas, and the Transportation element addresses how
various types of transit could impact or improve outcomes for the environment. Significant
among Seattle’s efforts to implement environmental policies is the Equity and Environment
Initiative, a partnership of the City, the community, several City departments, and private
foundations to deepen Seattle’s commitment to race and social justice in environmental
work.

Land
Discussion

Seattle’s growth and identity have been profoundly shaped by its stunning natural landscape. The first native and European settlers were drawn here by the area’s natural bounty
as well as the economic value of the land for logging and resource extraction. Today, our
city has become a magnet for those attracted to its lush landscapes and access to the





132

exceptional natural places in the region. Over time, our relationship and interaction with the
land has changed dramatically, but its critical importance in our lives remains.
Although the region looks very different than it did when European settlers first arrived 150
years ago, Seattle’s trees, vegetation, and soils still make up a vitally important system that
manages water runoff, cleans the air, mitigates greenhouse gas emissions and impacts, improves human health, and reduces the heat island effect. This natural system also provides
wildlife habitats, supports livable neighborhoods, and is integral to the essential character
of the Emerald City.
GOAL
EN G1

Foster healthy trees, vegetation, and soils to improve human health, provide wildlife
habitats, improve drainage, give residents across the city access to nature, provide
fresh food, and increase the quality of life for all Seattleites.

POLICIES
EN 1.1

Seek to achieve an urban forest that contains a thriving and sustainable mix of
tree species and ages, and that creates a contiguous and healthy ecosystem that is
valued and cared for by the City and all Seattleites as an essential environmental,
economic, and community asset.

EN 1.2

Strive to increase citywide tree canopy coverage to 30 percent by 2037 and to 40
percent over time.

EN 1.3

Use trees, vegetation, green stormwater infrastructure, amended soil, green roofs,
and other low-impact development features to meet drainage needs and reduce the
impacts of development.

EN 1.4

Increase the amount of permeable surface by reducing hardscape surfaces where
possible and maximizing the use of permeable paving elsewhere.

EN 1.5

Promote sustainable management of public and private open spaces, trees, and
vegetation by preserving or planting native and naturalized vegetation, removing
invasive plants, improving soil health, using integrated pest management, and
engaging the community in long-term stewardship activities.

EN 1.6

Strive to manage seven hundred million gallons of stormwater runoff each year with
green stormwater infrastructure by 2025.

EN 1.7

Promote the care and retention of trees and groups of trees that enhance Seattle’s
historical, cultural, recreational, environmental, and aesthetic character.

EN 1.8

Encourage gardening and food production by residents as a way to make fresh,
healthy food available in the city.





133

EN 1.9

Work with other levels of government and with the private sector to support and
encourage the cleanup of contaminated soil and other environmental remediation
associated with the re-use or expansion of industrial sites.

Water
Discussion

Seattle is a city of water. Puget Sound, Lake Washington, Lake Union, the Lake Washington
Ship Canal, the Duwamish River, Green Lake, urban creeks, and small lakes all enhance the
quality of life for the people and wildlife that live here. Four species of salmon—including
the threatened Chinook salmon—call this area home, as do resident trout, blue herons, bald
eagles, and a variety of other water-dependent species. Seattle’s major waterways bustle
with business and recreational opportunities, while also supporting one of the premier
industrial seaports on the West Coast. Moreover, Seattle’s aquatic areas give residents the
chance to enjoy and experience nature close to home.
Yet despite their integral place in the local culture, landscape, and economy, Seattle’s
aquatic resources have been significantly degraded as a result of urban growth. A six-mile
stretch of the Duwamish River is now a federal Superfund site. Over 90 percent of Seattle’s
146 miles of shoreline have been modified and now lack natural connections to the water.
The city’s creeks have seen stormwater flows equivalent to some rivers. Fish in local waters
contain high amounts of mercury and PCBs, and some of our coho salmon are dying before
they can reach Seattle streams to spawn. Yet even these resources, polluted as they may be,
have amazing vitality and resilience. They have the potential to become even greater assets
to Seattleites.
GOAL
EN G2

Foster healthy aquatic systems, including Puget Sound, lakes, creeks, rivers, and the
associated shorelines, to provide a high-quality of life in Seattle for all its residents
and a valuable habitat for fish and wildlife.

POLICIES
EN 2.1

Protect and improve water and sediment quality by controlling pollution sources
and treating stormwater through best management practices.

EN 2.2

Reduce combined sewer overflows by reducing stormwater inflows and increasing
storage in combined system areas.

EN 2.3

Seek to clean up existing contaminated sediments.





134

EN 2.4

Limit the use of chemicals that have negative impacts on aquatic or human health,
especially on City-owned property or rights-of-way.

EN 2.5

Manage flows in creeks to support a variety of aquatic life and to control flooding
and property damage caused by unregulated flows.

EN 2.6

Promote quality wildlife habitats in Seattle’s waterways by protecting and improving
migratory fish passageways, spawning grounds, wetlands, estuaries, and river
mouths.

EN 2.7

Work to identify and reduce flooding through improvements to drainage and
wastewater systems and reductions in impervious surfaces and runoff, particularly
in traditionally underserved areas.

Climate
Discussion

Climate change is a challenge of sobering magnitude and urgency. To confront it, Seattle
will need to draw on its own capacity for resilience and innovation. The ways we use our
land, design our buildings, and get around the city significantly impact the amount of
energy we use and the greenhouse gas emissions we produce. One of the key ways the City
will work toward its climate goals is through the urban village strategy. Cars and trucks are
Seattle’s largest source of greenhouse gas emissions, and concentrating new housing and
jobs in urban centers and urban villages near frequent transit service will reduce motorized-vehicle use in the city.
While concerted efforts to decrease greenhouse gas emissions can help address climate
change, emissions from past decades and ongoing emissions will continue to affect the
global climate. The most significant changes to the Pacific Northwest will be to temperature, precipitation, and sea level. The projected flooding, heat waves, and extreme high
tides are not new challenges in Seattle, and the City has strategies for responding to them.
However, climate change will shift the frequency, intensity, and timing of these events. If we
don’t prepare for these types of events now, they will significantly impact the city’s health,
infrastructure, and economy.
Marginalized populations are at greater risk from the impacts of climate change because
they have the fewest resources to respond to changing conditions. Taking action to reduce
the impacts of climate change and foster resilience in these communities is critical, as will
be supporting their recovery after extreme events.





135

GOAL
EN G3

Reduce Seattle’s greenhouse gas emissions by 58 percent from 2008 levels by 2030,
and become carbon neutral by 2050.

POLICIES
EN 3.1

Expand transit, walking, bicycling, and shared-transportation infrastructure and
services to provide safe, affordable and effective options for getting around that
produce low or zero emissions, particularly for lower-income households and
communities of color.

EN 3.2

Implement the urban village strategy with the goal of meeting the growing
demand for conveniently located homes and businesses in pedestrian-friendly
neighborhoods where residents can walk to a variety of recreation and service
offerings, in order to increase the number of trips that do not require automobile
use and increase access to opportunity for lower-income households and
communities of color.

EN 3.3

Implement innovative policies, such as road pricing and parking management, that
better reflect the true cost of driving and therefore lead to less automobile use,
while employing strategies that mitigate impacts on low-income residents.

EN 3.4

Encourage energy efficiency and the use of low-carbon energy sources, such as
waste heat and renewables, in both existing and new buildings.

EN 3.5

Reduce the amount of waste generated while at the same time increasing the
amount of waste that is recycled and composted.

EN 3.6

Reduce the emissions associated with the life cycle of goods and services by
encouraging the use of durable, local products and recycled-content or reused
materials, and recycling at the end of products’ lives.

EN 3.7

Support a food system that encourages consumption of local foods and healthy
foods with a low carbon footprint, reduces food waste, and fosters composting.

GOAL
EN G4

Prepare for the likely impacts of climate change, including changing rain patterns,
increased temperatures and heat events, shifting habitats, more intense storms, and
rising sea level.

POLICIES
EN 4.1

Consider projected climate impacts when developing plans or designing and siting
infrastructure, in order to maximize the function and longevity of infrastructure
investments, while also limiting impacts on marginalized populations and fostering
resilient social and natural systems.





136

EN 4.2

Prioritize actions that reduce risk and enhance resilience in populations nearest
the likely impacts of climate change, including actions that are driven by the
communities most impacted by climate change.

EN 4.3

Focus strategies to address the impacts of climate change, in particular, on the
needs of marginalized populations and seniors, since these groups often have the
fewest resources to respond to changing conditions and therefore may be more
severely impacted.

EN 4.4

Partner with communities most impacted by climate change to identify local
community assets, including infrastructure, cultural institutions, community centers,
and social networks that can be supported and leveraged in adaption planning.

Environmental Justice
Discussion

Marginalized populations are more likely than other Seattle residents to live close to pollution sources. This is because rents are often lower in these areas. However, living in those
places could expose those populations to potential negative effects of the nearby pollution.
Seattle wants to make the city a safe and healthy city for all people who live here.
GOAL
EN G5

Seek to ensure that environmental benefits are equitably distributed and
environmental burdens are minimized and equitably shared by all Seattleites.

POLICIES
EN 5.1

Consider the cost and benefits of policy and investment options on different
communities, including the cost of compliance as well as outcomes.

EN 5.2

Prioritize investments, policies, and programs that address existing disparities in the
distribution of environmental burdens and benefits.

EN 5.3

Prioritize strategies with cobenefits that support other equity goals such as
promoting living wage jobs or enhancing social connectedness.

EN 5.4

Assess facilities and services periodically to determine the environmental impacts
they may be having on marginalized populations, and identify ways to mitigate
those impacts.

EN 5.5

Work towards achieving racial and social equity in health outcomes so that
members of all communities have the opportunity to live long healthy lives.





137

Parks and Open Space

Introduction
Parks and open space help make Seattle a great place to live, play, and raise families. These
places contribute not only to the city’s environmental health but also to the physical and
mental health of its residents. Access to open space can benefit individuals by giving them
places to exercise their bodies and refresh their minds. Open spaces also provide valuable
wildlife and vegetation habitat that might otherwise be scarce in the city.
The City-owned park and recreation system comprises about 11 percent of the total city
land area. It includes gardens, community centers, boating facilities, and environmental
education centers. From the magnificent views off the bluffs of Discovery Park to the treelined boulevard system and intimate pocket parks, these areas provide opportunities for
residents and visitors to relax, enjoy competitive games, exercise, or meet with friends and
neighbors.





138

Developed parks are not the only sources of open space that people enjoy in the city. There
are also open spaces and recreation opportunities located in public rights-of-way, such as
along Cheasty and Ravenna Boulevards or in Bell Street Park. Off-road bike trails, including the Burke-Gilman Trail and Alki Beach Park, offer other types of active recreation. An
extensive system of P-Patches and community gardens throughout the city offer gardening
spaces for residents to grow their own fruits, vegetables, and flowers. Seattle Center, which
itself is not part of the City parks system, is nevertheless a unique urban amenity that offers
both open space and a wide variety of cultural activities.
Other agencies also provide open spaces in the city. These include fields and playgrounds
at public and private schools, areas such as the federal Chittenden Locks, several waterfront
access points provided by the Port of Seattle, and the open spaces on several college and
university campuses. Numerous private developments have made plazas and other open
areas available to the public, such as Waterfall Garden Park in Pioneer Square.
In addition to the areas enjoyed by the public, there are many private open spaces in the
city. These areas—such as yards in neighborhood residential and multifamily zones—also
provide light, air, and breathing room that benefit everyone in the city.
Puget Sound and the city’s lakes provide another form of open space. These wide stretches
of water are open to the sky and offer visual relief from the urban environment, as well as
visual connections to other areas of the city and region.
In 2014 voters in Seattle approved the formation of the Seattle Park District. This district
provides a new taxing authority and funding source for the maintenance and improvement
of City parks, as well as for programs aimed at serving historically underserved residents
and communities. Some of the ways the City obtains new parkland are by using state funds,
acquiring surplus federal land, establishing requirements for new development projects,
providing incentives for developers, and creatively using public rights-of-way.

Access to Open Space
Discussion

The city has a robust citywide park and open space system. These open spaces are available for use by all. However, the City continues to look for ways to improve this system.
Seattle is already very developed, so there aren’t many opportunities to find new land for
open spaces. Creating the system that we desire—and one that will serve the growing city—
will require new strategies, including some that will increase the capacity of existing parks.
We will have to find the right balance between active and passive recreational activities
throughout the park system, build better access through the City’s transportation planning,





139

and provide access to open space and recreational programming as part of public and
private development.

Public health studies indicate that
proximity to parks is associated with
greater levels of physical activity as well
as increased park use. Open spaces in
Seattle are well distributed and available throughout the city. However, a
recent study found that lower-income
people are less likely to participate in
physical activity than people with higher incomes, as shown on the accompanying table.

Seattle Residents’ Participation in Recreational Activities
Percentage of residents who participate
Participate in activities provided
by Seattle Parks and Recreation
Participate in activities sponsored
by a private gym or employer

36%
24%
39%

Walk or jog in or along a park
daily or weekly

37%

Visit a natural area daily or weekly
Use an athletic field more often
than yearly

Income more
than $100,000

54%

Visit a small neighborhood or
community park daily or weekly

20%

Income less
than $50,000

54%

68%
63%

36%
36%

51%

Source: City of Seattle Parks Legacy Plan Survey, conducted in 2012

This section addresses the design and distribution of our citywide park and open space
system, including how new parks and open space are acquired and developed. The Seattle
Parks and Recreation Department’s Development Plan also contains specific goals for
Seattle’s parks, open space, and facilities such as community centers, athletic fields, and
playgrounds.
GOAL
P G1

Provide a variety of outdoor and indoor spaces throughout the city for all people to
play, learn, contemplate, and build community.

POLICIES
P 1.1

Continue to expand the City’s park holdings and open space opportunities, with
special emphasis on serving urban centers and urban villages that are home to
marginalized populations and areas that have been traditionally underserved.

P 1.2

Provide a variety of parks and open space to serve the city’s growing population
consistent with the priorities and level-of-service standards identified in the City’s
Parks and Open Space Plan.

P 1.3

Provide urban trails, green streets, and boulevards in public rights-of-way as
recreation and transportation options and as ways to connect open spaces and
parks to each other, to urban centers and villages, and to the regional open space
system.

P 1.4

Make rights-of-way available on a temporary basis to provide space for community
events, such as street fairs, farmers’ markets, or neighborhood celebrations.





140

P 1.5

Provide areas to preserve important natural or ecological features in public
ownership, and allow people access to these spaces.

P 1.6

Provide public access to shorelines by using street ends, regulation, or acquisition.

P 1.7

Encourage or require private developers to incorporate on-site publicly accessible
open space.

P 1.8

Consider the use of open space impact fees and other financing mechanisms to help
fund open space system improvements that will serve the expected growth.

P 1.9

Use cooperative agreements with Seattle Public Schools and other public agencies
to provide access to open spaces they control.

P 1.10

Create healthy places for children and adults to play, as well as areas for more
passive strolling, viewing, and picnicking.

P 1.11

Make investments in park facilities and programs to reduce health disparities by
providing access to open space and recreational activities for all Seattle residents,
especially marginalized populations, seniors, and children.

P 1.12

Design open spaces that protect the natural environment and provide light, air, and
visual relief within the built environment.

P 1.13

Make the most of the limited available land by developing parks and open spaces so
that they can accommodate a variety of active and passive recreational uses.

P 1.14

Provide for access by transit, bicycle, and foot when siting and designing new park
facilities or improving existing ones.

P 1.15

Engage with community members to design and develop parks and facilities based
on the specific needs and cultures of the communities the park is intended to serve.

P 1.16

Increase access to public land by assessing, managing, and cleaning up
contaminated sites.

P 1.17

Create innovative opportunities to use existing public land, especially in the right
of way, for open space and recreation, including street plazas, pavement to parks,
parklets, lidding of reservoirs and highways, and community gardens.

Parks and Recreation Activities
Discussion

Seattle Parks and Recreation provides programs and facilities that let people play, learn,
and lead healthy, active lives. People gather, take classes, exercise, and play sports at community centers, pools, and lakes. Other City facilities, such as golf courses, boating centers,
and tennis courts, offer additional opportunities for recreation. Seattle Parks and Recreation





141

offers programs for teens and classes that provide opportunities for lifelong learning and
recreation options for those with disabilities.
GOAL
P G2

Continue to provide opportunities for all people across Seattle to participate in a
variety of recreational activities.

POLICIES
P 2.1

Consider the use of open space impact fees to help fund recreational facility system
improvements that will serve the expected growth.

P 2.2

Develop a long-term strategic plan that accounts for citywide and neighborhood
demographics, as well as the demand for various active and passive recreation
activities.

P 2.3

Establish partnerships with public and private organizations to supplement
programming that supports residents’ needs and interests.

P 2.4

Develop activities at community centers based on the specific needs of each
community they serve and make them neighborhood focal points where people
can enhance their individual health and well-being and strengthen a sense of
community.

P 2.5

Promote the use of open spaces and park facilities in the city for events that
celebrate our history and the many cultures of our community.

P 2.6

Provide recreation and social programs that allow older adults to remain healthy
and actively involved in their community.

P 2.7

Provide athletic fields that can serve as places where people of diverse ages,
backgrounds, and interests can engage in a variety of sports.

P 2.8

Offer fun and safe water experiences through a diverse range of healthy and
accessible aquatic programs at outdoor and indoor venues throughout the city.

P 2.9

Provide welcoming, accessible, and affordable recreation and social programs for
people with disabilities and their families.

P 2.10

Engage teens with activities that help them to build their identities and to acquire
skills that will lead to healthy and productive lives.

P 2.11

Develop programs that foster awareness and appreciation of nature from the
neighborhood scale to the regional scale and provide activities for residents to help
protect or restore the environment.

P 2.12

Provide programs that are culturally responsive, accessible, welcoming, and
affordable to communities of color and to immigrant and refugee communities.





142

P 2.13

Provide welcoming, accessible, and affordable recreation and social programs for
LGBTQ youth and adults.

P 2.14

Develop partnerships with organizations that consider race and social justice to be
fundamental to their operations and business practices.

Maintaining Park and Recreation Facilities
Discussion

The City’s park system makes up a significant amount of the city’s land, and that land contains many types of buildings, swimming pools, trails, landscaped and natural areas, and
urban forests. Keeping these facilities safe and enjoyable requires constant attention.
GOAL
P G3

Manage the City’s park and recreation facilities to provide safe and welcoming
places.

POLICIES
P 3.1

Implement capital improvements that are driven by a long-term programmatic
strategic plan.

P 3.2

Maintain the long-term viability of park and recreation facilities by regularly
addressing major maintenance needs.

P 3.3

Look for innovative ways to approach construction and major maintenance
activities to limit water and energy use and to maximize environmental
sustainability.

P 3.4

Enhance wildlife habitat by restoring forests and expanding the tree canopy on Cityowned land.

P 3.5

Protect habitat and wildlife areas through education, interpretation, and wildlifemanagement programs.

P 3.6

Preserve and reclaim park property for public use and benefit, and ensure
continued access to parkland for the growing population.

P 3.7

Leverage capital and program investments and agreements with private vendors
to provide training, apprenticeships, youth employment, and living wage job
opportunities for marginalized populations.





143

Major Open Space Attractions
Discussion

Some of the facilities maintained by Seattle Parks and Recreation and certain other open
spaces in the city attract many visitors from outside their immediate neighborhoods.
Washington Park Arboretum, Woodland Park Zoo, Kubota Garden, Seattle Aquarium,
Magnuson Park, the Olympic Sculpture Park, and Seattle Center are examples of locations
that offer natural and cultural attractions and bring users from across the region into
Seattle’s neighborhoods.
GOAL
P G4

Plan and maintain regional parks and facilities to accommodate the people who will
want to visit them, while respecting the facilities’ neighbors.

POLICIES
P 4.1

Develop plans for regional and special-use parks to take advantage of unique
natural and cultural features in the city, enhance visitors’ experiences, and nurture
partnerships with other public agencies and private organizations.

P 4.2

Design parks and program activities in Downtown in ways that create a welcoming
and safe environment.

P 4.3

Recognize that visitors to major regional attractions can impact the neighborhoods
surrounding those facilities, and look for ways to limit those impacts, including
through enhanced walking, biking, and transit connections.

P 4.4

Look for innovative ways to conduct construction and major maintenance of park
facilities that will provide training, apprenticeships, youth employment, and living
wage opportunities for marginalized populations.





144

Arts and Culture

Introduction
Arts and culture are part of the city’s rich history. They will play a major role in Seattle’s future as a vital, thriving city. As in any dynamic urban area, the city’s arts and culture contribute to its identity and sense of place. This aspect of the city enriches the lives of its residents
and inspires their creativity and innovation.
Arts and culture extend to all aspects of civic life. For instance, the arts can teach students
valuable skills—like critical thinking and observation—that can also be applied in math, science, and reading. These skills help students succeed in school and in the workplace. The
city’s arts and culture scene creates jobs and attracts visitors, customers, and highly skilled
workers to the area. At the same time, arts and culture play an important social role by
nurturing a welcoming and diverse urban community. Arts and culture can expand perspectives and encourage empathy toward people with different experiences. They help cultivate
a greater appreciation and understanding of diverse cultures across Seattle.





145

A 2012 study by Seattle Public Schools found large disparities in access to arts education among its students. The
study measured the number of students taking at least six
arts classes during their middle school and high school
years. The students who took fewer than six art classes were

•
•
•

from low-household incomes,
non-native English speakers,
and/or
African American, American Indian/
Alaska Native, and Hispanic.

The Arts and Culture element of this Plan outlines goals and policies related to the arts, cultural institutions, and historic preservation. Together these aspects of the city encompass a
broad range of people, activities, spaces, and levels of involvement. The City is committed
to supporting the arts and to offering great experiences for art consumers and creators of
art across Seattle. Making arts and culture accessible to all requires programs that represent
Seattle’s diversity. As Seattle grows, the City must make an extra effort to help everyone feel
welcome within Seattle’s arts and cultural environment.
Experiencing arts and culture should be fun and challenging. It should also be accessible so
that it can be enjoyed regularly by all. There are so many ways to experience art. It can be
created or observed or collaborated on. From tangible, physical objects, books, and digital
works to experiences, gatherings, performances, and oral histories, the Seattle arts scene
has many different points of entry. Cultural spaces are varied and can range from traditional
theaters, galleries, and studios to schools, parks, libraries, and coffee shops.
As noted in the Historic Preservation and Cultural Resources section contained in the Land
Use element of this Plan, historic and cultural resource preservation recognizes and protects aspects of our chared cultural heritage- buildings, districts, and designed landscapes
that link to Seattle’s past. Older buildings, sites and objects play a vital role in defining
Seattle’s sense of place and the character of its neighborhoods.

Public Art
Discussion

By integrating art into diverse public settings, Seattle has built on its reputation as a cultural
center of innovation and creativity. Letting both visitors and locals alike encounter art in
parks, libraries, and community centers—as well as on roadways, bridges, and other public
venues—enriches people’s daily lives and gives voice to artists. The City’s public art collection includes more than four hundred permanently sited and integrated works and three
thousand portable works. The collection will continue to grow through the City’s 1 Percent
for Art program, which requires that 1 percent of the funds from eligible capital improvement projects be set aside for the commission, purchase, and installation of artworks in a
variety of settings. To commission public art, the City uses a panel made up of artists and





146

arts professionals, alongside community and City representatives. All public art is cared
for through ongoing conservation, which includes inspections, major restorative work, and
routine maintenance.
GOAL
AC G1

Strengthen the diversity of public art and expand the City’s collection of public
artworks.

POLICIES
AC 1.1

Continue to set aside funding for new public art as part of capital improvement
projects.

AC 1.2

Encourage the inclusion of artists early in the design of capital improvement
projects.

AC 1.3

Prioritize locations for new public art where it is desired by the community, can be
accommodated safely, and will be enjoyed by many people in locations throughout
the city.

AC 1.4

Enhance the diversity of panelists and community representatives that are included
in the public-art selection process.

AC 1.5

Strengthen the diversity of expression in public art to embrace a variety of artists,
sites, disciplines, and media to fully reflect the cultural diversity of the city.

AC 1.6

Encourage public participation in the planning and implementation of public art
projects.

Creative Economy
Discussion

Partnering with individual artists, as well as arts and cultural organizations, the City strives
to offer all Seattleites a rich array of quality art opportunities while promoting a healthy and
diverse cultural community. Encompassing a wide variety of arts and cultural businesses,
ranging from nonprofit museums, symphonies, and theaters to for-profit film, architecture,
and advertising companies, the creative economy also includes thousands of independent
artists working in Seattle.
When supported, arts and culture can help drive the City’s future economic growth. Arts
companies and their employees stimulate innovation, playing an important role in building and sustaining economic vibrancy in Seattle. They employ a creative workforce, spend





147

money locally, generate government revenue, and are a cornerstone of tourism. The
arts are also an economic-development tool, creating neighborhoods where businesses
want to operate and employees want to live. The creative economy also contributes to
Seattle’s high-quality of life, helping our city and region attract talent from across the globe.
Encouraging creative economy activities in communities of color can provide pathways to
new skills, jobs, and prosperity. In other words, the impact of the arts reaches far beyond
aesthetics.
GOAL
AC G2

Enhance support for artists, creative professionals, and cultural organizations,
allowing them to grow and mature.

POLICIES
AC 2.1

Recognize and expand the economic impact of arts and culture. Consider ways to
support arts and culture as part of an economic development strategy.

AC 2.2

Recognize and regularly assess the economic impact of Seattle’s music and nightlife
sector.

AC 2.3

Encourage collaboration across the spectrum of traditional and creative economy
businesses, especially businesses that rely on innovation and design to be
competitive.

AC 2.4

Encourage access to affordable workspaces for artists, musicians, arts, and cultural
organizations.

AC 2.5

Improve technical- and financial-assistance programs to better target and serve
artists and arts organizations, musicians and live music venues of various sizes and
at various stages of growth, representing a broad range of cultures. Consider ways
to make the City’s funding programs more accessible to small, independent artists,
musicians and arts organizations particularly from underrepresented communities.

AC 2.6

Enhance equitable access to technical and financial assistance for all artists and
organizations.

AC 2.7

Work with public, not-for-profit and private organizations to support artists, arts
organizations and cultural organizations to help them thrive.

Youth Development and Arts Education
Discussion

All students in all schools should be given the chance to learn through the arts. The arts are
a core component of basic education, uniquely suited to develop twenty-first-century skills





148

such as creative and critical thinking, communication, collaboration, and perseverance—
skills directly linked to student success in school, career, and life.
Partnerships, both inside and outside of City government, are needed to bring back equitable
access to arts education for all K–12 students. These collaborations will also help support
after-school arts programs in diverse neighborhoods throughout the city. Through these
in-school and after-school programs, experienced teaching artists, community groups, and
cultural organizations can introduce children to all types of art, including visual arts, theater,
dance, and film. Such programs give young people a chance to shine, to express themselves, and to develop positive goals for the future. Providing arts programs in schools with
high numbers of low-income students is especially important, as many schools provide arts
programs with additional funding from parents. This may not be possible in some schools.
GOAL
AC G3

Improve access to arts and music education in all schools and outside the school
setting so that students are prepared to be successful in school and life.

POLICIES
AC 3.1

Encourage schools to offer culturally relevant K–12 arts curricula that emphasize
development and assessment of twenty-first-century skills.

AC 3.2

Encourage schools to provide professional development in the arts for teachers and
community arts partners.

AC 3.3

Expand partnerships with educational institutions, arts and music institutions,
youth service agencies, libraries, foundations, businesses, and arts and cultural
organizations to increase participation in arts, music and cultural programs, creative
learning opportunities, and creative economy careers.

AC 3.4

Help make arts and music education available in areas of high violence and poverty
or where school performance is poor.

AC 3.5

Prioritize arts and culture opportunities for youth and communities with limited or
no access to the arts.

Cultural Space and Placemaking
Discussion

Every successful neighborhood includes cultural spaces, which not only house a range
of cultural activity but also help define the very social character and identity of neighborhoods. These spaces include traditional spots such as theaters, galleries, art-house





149

cinemas, and museums, as well as nontraditional areas such as music clubs, coffeehouses
and bars that hang art, bookstores, and behind-the-scenes places such as artists’ studios,
rehearsal rooms, and offices. Creative placemaking uses arts and culture to increase the
vibrancy of neighborhoods, cities, and regions. Instead of a single arts center or a cluster of
large arts and cultural institutions, placemaking enriches public and private spaces, structures, and streetscapes to enhance quality of life and strengthen neighborhood identity.
Creatively attracting people to places that need revitalization or are vacant or underutilized
can also improve local business and public safety while bringing diverse people together.
GOAL
AC G4

Support affordable cultural spaces in all neighborhoods, especially urban centers
and villages where they are accessible to a broad range of people and where they
can help activate the public realm.

POLICIES
AC 4.1

Create and maintain an inventory of both public and private cultural spaces.

AC 4.2

Create incentives to preserve or expand space for artists, arts organizations,
musicians, music organizations, and other cultural uses.

AC 4.3

Consider making surplus City-owned property available to artists, musicians, and
arts and cultural organizations.

AC 4.4

Encourage the adaptive reuse of historic community structures, such as meeting
halls, schools, and religious buildings, for uses that continue their role as
neighborhood anchors.

AC 4.5

Consider public-private partnerships as a way to provide affordable space to artists
and arts, musicians, and cultural organizations.

AC 4.6

Encourage partnerships to use public and institutional spaces, such as parks,
community centers, libraries, hospitals, schools, universities, and City-owned
places, for arts, musicians, and culture.

AC 4.7

Encourage the designation of existing clusters of cultural spaces as cultural districts.

AC 4.8

Encourage partnerships between the public, private, and nonprofit sectors to
engage in creative placemaking projects.

AC 4.9

Create a toolkit, in partnership with City departments and communities, to assist
communities in making their own art, music, and culture.

AC 4.10 Establish creative placemaking as part of local area planning.
AC 4.11

Encourage the creation of cultural spaces for informal gathering and recreation,
especially in more densely populated urban centers and villages and in
communities of color that lack cultural spaces.





150

AC 4.12 Enhance access to a variety of arts, music and cultural institutions and programs
for at-risk youth, non-English-speaking residents, seniors, the visually and hearing
impaired, and people with other disabilities.
AC 4.13 Recognize the importance of live music and entertainment venues to the vibrancy
of the city’s culture. Support the viability of these small businesses and nonprofits
in areas undergoing development through policies that proactively engage and
balance the interests of music venues and new residents.





151

Community Well-Being

Introduction
The goal of the planning, building, and investing described in other elements of this Plan
is to make Seattle a better place for its residents. While the city’s physical features, such as
its walkability, good quality housing, and accessible parks and open spaces, can enhance
Seattleites’ health and happiness, the overall well-being of a community depends on much
more. This element of the Plan goes beyond the physical features of the city and its neighborhoods to focus on the overall well-being of Seattleites. The City invests in people so that
all families and individuals can meet their basic needs, share in our economic prosperity,
and participate in building a safe, healthy, educated, just, and caring community.
This element emphasizes the importance of the human and social infrastructure of the city.
Seattle’s community is built and strengthened through social relationships formed around
common values, arts and culture, ethnicity, education, family, and age groups.





152

While the City provides many services directly, it also supports the work of other public and
private organizations. This element addresses how we build communities through programs, services, activities, and community involvement to make the city welcoming, safe,
and engaging.

Supportive and Healthy Communities
Discussion

Healthy, sustainable, and safe communities are products of people working together. When
residents respect one another, invest time and energy in their collaborations, and commit
to them, their communities thrive. City government has an important role to play, but government and institutions cannot create or sustain community if individuals do not connect
to the community. Children and youth are critical to the future of our city’s social well-being,
while elders can help sustain our history and culture. Getting involved in community
activities allows people to see the impact of their actions and can help them build supportive relationships with those around them. The City can support relationship-building by
encouraging the participation of all members of the community.

One way to measure people’s
participation in their community
is whether they choose to vote in
elections that affect decisions that
could impact their lives. Nationally,
people with low-incomes turn out
to vote at lower rates than people
with high incomes. Voter turnout
also varies by age, educational
attainment, homeownership, and
years living in the same home. The
varying voter turnout rates seen in
Seattle’s neighborhoods suggest
similar dynamics here.

Voter Turnout by Precinct
November 2015 Election
6–24%
25–38%
39–46%
47–54%
55–70%

Voter Turnout by Precinct
November 2015 Election
6 - 24%
25 - 38%
39 - 46%

No registered voters
47 - 54%
55 - 70%
No registered voters
Source: King County Elections

Source: King County Elections
Note: Voter turnout refers to the
percentage of registered voters
who cast their vote in an election.

GOAL
CW G1

Make Seattle a place where all residents feel they can be active in family,
community, and neighborhood life, and where they help each other, contribute to
the vitality of the city, and create a sense of belonging among all Seattleites.





153

POLICIES
CW 1.1

Promote opportunities for people to build connections with their peers, neighbors,
and the greater community by supporting intergenerational and intercultural
programs, activities, and events.

CW 1.2

Promote volunteerism and community service among people of all ages and
cultures by providing information about opportunities to contribute their time,
energy, or resources.

CW 1.3

Enhance opportunities for children and youth to gain skills, increase self-esteem,
and envision a positive future.

CW 1.4

Reinforce efforts that strengthen the ability of children, youth, and families to
participate in their health, wellness, and education, and to contribute to the
development of a vibrant, growing community.

CW 1.5

Celebrate young people’s accomplishments, and promote activities for children and
youth to increase their participation in the community.

CW 1.6

Engage older residents in community conversations and volunteer opportunities so
that they can find fulfillment in ways that benefit themselves and the community.

CW 1.7

Collaborate with marginalized communities on strategies they identify to reduce
and ameliorate displacement and related issues specific to those communities.

Access to Food and Shelter
Discussion

Seattle’s quality of life and economic future depend on the overall health of its people. With
a growing population, the City must be innovative and responsive in helping all Seattleites
meet their basic needs. There are people in the city who lack food or shelter, who are vulnerable, or who face barriers to functioning independently. The City’s goal is to make Seattle
the kind of place where all people want to live and raise their families, and where those who
are most vulnerable have access to the assistance they need. See the Housing element for
how the City works to provide housing for low-income households. Ensuring that people in
our communities have access to food and shelter before and after an emergency or disaster
is especially critical.





154

Area service providers and
shelters report heightened risk
for homelessness for people of
color, youth identifying as LGBTQ,
military veterans, the disabled,
people with mental illnesses, and
people with substance abuse. For
example:

•
•
•

About 71 percent of the people in family shelters are people of color.
58 percent of people in Seattle’s shelters for adults report having a
disability, and 16 percent report having served in the military.
More than 20 percent of the city’s homeless and unstably housed
youth and young adults identified as LGBTQ (lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender, or queer).

Source: “Homeless Needs Assessment,” City of Seattle 2014–2017 Consolidated
Plan for Housing & Community Development.

GOAL
CW G2

Reduce poverty and its effects, which make people, especially children and elderly
adults, vulnerable.

POLICIES
CW 2.1

Encourage coordinated service delivery for food, housing, health care, and other
basic necessities for people and families in need.

CW 2.2

Contribute to efforts that help people meet their basic needs, maintain their
independence as long as possible, and remain in their neighborhoods of choice.

CW 2.3

Support efforts to provide access to healthy, affordable food for all people in
Seattle.

CW 2.4

Encourage public and private efforts that support culturally appropriate food
opportunities, including grocery stores, farmers’ markets, food banks, and nutrition
programs, especially to meet the nutritional needs of infants, children, elders, and
other vulnerable populations in their neighborhoods.

CW 2.5

Provide access to healthy food by encouraging better distribution and marketing
of healthy options throughout the city and by addressing nutrition standards in
programs supported by the City.

CW 2.6

Encourage local food production, processing, and distribution through the support
of home and community gardens, farmers’ markets, community kitchens, and other
collaborative initiatives to provide healthy foods and promote food security.

CW 2.7

Consider using City land to expand the capacity to grow, process, distribute, and
access local food, particularly for distribution to households in need.

CW 2.8

Invest in services and programs that prevent homelessness, provide a pathway to
permanent housing, and allow temporary shelter for those who are homeless.

CW 2.9

Place special emphasis on programs addressing those who are most vulnerable to
homelessness.





155

CW 2.10 Develop an increased level of emergency preparedness among all segments of the
population to help coordinate governmental response and recovery efforts that
seek to minimize the adversity of a major emergency or disaster.

Healthy Growth, Aging, and Lifestyles
Discussion

A person’s health greatly affects his or her quality of life and ability to participate fully in the
community. Social and environmental factors, as well as access to health care, all contribute to an individual’s overall personal health. City efforts can promote healthy choices, help
people avoid risk, and provide assistance to those who encounter health problems.
GOAL
CW G3

Create a healthy environment where community members of all ages, stages of
life, and life circumstances are able to aspire to and achieve a healthy life, are well
nourished, and have access to affordable health care.

POLICIES
CW 3.1

Encourage Seattleites to adopt healthy and active lifestyles to improve their general
physical and mental health and well-being and to promote healthy aging. Provide
information about and promote access to affordable opportunities for people to
participate in fitness and recreational activities and to enjoy the outdoors.

CW 3.2

Work toward the reduction of health risks and behaviors leading to chronic and
infectious diseases and infant mortality, with particular emphasis on populations
disproportionately affected by these conditions.

CW 3.3

Collaborate with Public Health—Seattle & King County, private hospitals, and
community health clinics to maximize access to health care coverage for preventive
care, behavioral health, family planning, and long-term care.

CW 3.4

Seek to improve the quality and equity of access to health care, including physical
and mental health, emergency medical care, addiction services, and long-term care
by collaborating with community organizations and health providers to advocate for
quality health care and broader accessibility to services.

CW 3.5

Support access to preventive interventions at agencies that serve the homeless,
mentally ill, and chemically dependent populations.

CW 3.6

Support efforts to reduce exposure to secondhand tobacco smoke in indoor and
outdoor areas, particularly where vulnerable populations, such as children and
seniors, are likely to be present.





156

CW 3.7

Require healthy building methods and materials in City-funded projects, and
encourage private development to use construction methods and materials that
result in healthy indoor environments for all Seattleites.

Lifelong Learning
Discussion

Well-educated people have the skills to pursue opportunities and careers of their choice.
Providing quality education for all Seattleites requires coordination with Seattle Public
Schools, libraries, colleges, and universities, as well as with other public agencies, nonprofit
agencies, community groups, and business organizations. Through cooperation with these
groups and with the community, the City can help make quality education, learning, and
training available to children, youth, and adults.

Each fall, kindergarten teachers in
Washington do an assessment of their
students’ skills in six domains: social emotional, physical, cognitive, language, literacy, and mathematics.
Seattle Public Schools teachers find
that students of color and students
in low-income households are less
kindergarten-ready than classroom
peers. In 2015, 52 percent of students
overall demonstrated skills typical of
a kindergartner across all six domains,
compared with significantly lower percentages of low-income students and
students of black or African American,
Pacific Islander, or Hispanic ethnicity.

Kindergarten Readiness in Seattle Public Schools
Share of Students Demonstrating Expected Skills
in All of the Six Domains Assessed

70%
40%

59%

51%

36%

40%

18%
White

Black

Asian

Native
Two or
Hawaiian/ more
Other Pacific races
Islander

By Race and Ethnicity

Hispanic/
Latino of
any race

Low Income
Any Race/
Ethnicity

Source: Fall 2015 WaKIDS assessment, Washington State School Report Card,
Office of the Superintendent of Public Instruction.

GOAL
CW G4

Support an education system and opportunities for lifelong learning that strengthen
literacy and employability for all Seattleites.





157

POLICIES
CW 4.1

Create equitable access to high-quality early-learning services, and support families
so that their children are prepared for school.

CW 4.2

Support schools’ efforts to develop culturally competent disciplinary practices
that keep children engaged with their schools, while still requiring behavioral
accountability.

CW 4.3

Encourage parent, volunteer, business, and community support for education and
involvement in schools.

CW 4.4

Support Seattle Public Schools’ efforts to create safe learning environments in and
after school that promote academic and personal achievement for all children and
youth.

CW 4.5

Support opportunities for community-based learning through service projects that
have value to both the students and the community.

CW 4.6

Work with schools, higher education institutions, libraries, community centers, and
arts and cultural agencies and organizations to link services into a seamless system
that helps students stay in school, such as through collocation of services and joint
use of facilities.

CW 4.7

Support programs that help people who have dropped out or are at risk of dropping
out of high school to achieve education, personal, and employment goals.

CW 4.8

Provide literacy development and related resources for English-language learners.

CW 4.9

Work with colleges, universities, other institutions of higher learning, and
community-based organizations to promote lifelong learning opportunities and
encourage the broadest possible access to libraries, community centers, schools,
and other existing facilities throughout the city.

CW 4.10 Work with schools, libraries, and other educational institutions, community based organizations, businesses, labor unions, and other governments to develop
strong educational and training programs that provide pathways to successful
employment.
CW 4.11 Support youth-based job-training opportunities that provide classes, coaching, and
the development of skills leading to jobs with livable wages.

Public Safety
Discussion

Public safety is a shared responsibility shouldered by individuals, families, and communities alike. It should include focus on early intervention, such as human service efforts that
prevent unsafe situations from occurring and other efforts that intervene before situations





158

become serious. Building safer communities requires the commitment of all Seattleites,
from youth to adults. City government can act as a connector in this effort. It can help build
partnerships between the individuals, agencies, and other groups that work to address the
safety needs of individuals and the community at large.
GOAL
CW G5

Reduce violence and the incidence of crimes, and increase the sense of security
throughout the city.

POLICIES
CW 5.1

Coordinate across City departments and with other agencies to address violence,
abuse, and exploitation and to hold offenders accountable.

CW 5.2

Plan and implement best and promising practices that focus on preventing violence.

CW 5.3

Ensure that violence prevention, violence intervention, and offender accountability
programs are culturally and linguistically appropriate.

CW 5.4

Increase awareness of all forms of violence and abuse and the resources that exist
to assist in dealing with these issues.

CW 5.5

Emphasize education, prevention, and early intervention to reduce the risk of
exposure to negative health impacts, violence, and injury.

CW 5.6

Encourage efforts that enhance strong family relationships and healthy child
development to help prevent child abuse, sexual assault, and domestic violence.

CW 5.7

Work in partnership with state, county, and community agencies to prevent
violence, including that associated with substance abuse, and firearms injuries.

CW 5.8

Encourage a policing strategy that works in partnership with the community to
reduce crime through education and enforcement.

CW 5.9

Encourage communities to build block-by-block networks to prevent crime, develop
social networks, and solve common problems.

CW 5.10 Provide competent, professional, and efficient City criminal-justice services that
hold those who commit crimes accountable, reduce recidivism, and achieve a fair
and just outcome.
CW 5.11 Work in partnership with the state, King County, and community organizations to
connect local detention facilities with the health and human service systems.
CW 5.12 Reinforce the linkage between public safety and human services to encourage lawful
behavior, reduce vulnerabilities of street populations, and address family violence
and sexual assault.
CW 5.13 Strive to prevent youth crime, youth violence, and gang activity by promoting efforts
that strengthen the community and create capacity for youth to be involved in





159

programs and activities that are alternatives to crime and violence, and that provide
a positive path for their lives.
CW 5.14 Work with Seattle Public Schools to make schools safe places where all youth can
experience success in education and preparation for future productive lives.
CW 5.15 Strengthen the relationship between Seattle Public Schools and the Seattle Public
Library to provide safe places outside of school for children and youth to learn,
explore, and connect with other educational, workforce, and personal development
opportunities.
CW 5.16 Promote information sharing and resource coordination among the courts, jails,
prosecutors, and police for greater efficiency and more equitable outcomes in the
criminal-justice system.
CW 5.17 Report crime statistics periodically to guide future decisions about programs and
resource allocation that can help control crime and make Seattleites feel safer in the
city.

A Multicultural City
Discussion

Seattle benefits from diversity. We celebrate the richness of our diverse heritage, talents,
and perspectives, all of which build a stronger Seattle. Seattle envisions a city where racial
inequities have been eliminated and racial equity achieved. The City’s Race and Social
Justice Initiative aims to end institutional racism in City government, eliminate race-based
disparities, and promote multiculturalism and full community involvement by all residents.

The number of people
of color living in Seattle
continued to increase
between 2000 and 2010,
but much more slowly than
it did in the remainder of
King County. This was true
particularly for people under
age eighteen. The number of
children of color increased
by only 2 percent in Seattle,
compared with 64 percent in
the balance of King County.



Population Growth from 2000 to 2010
Seattle and Remainder of King County
Increase in
Total Pop.

Increase in
Pop. of Color

Growth Rate
of Total Pop.

Growth Rate of
Pop. of Color

Seattle

45,286

24,240

8%

13%

Remainder of
King County

148,929

193,802

13%

69%

Increase in
Total Pop.
Under Age 18

Increase in
Pop. of Color
Under Age 18

Growth Rate
of Total Pop.
Under Age 18

Growth Rate of
Pop. of Color
Under Age 18

Seattle

5,686

896

6%

2%

Remainder of
King County

17,170

59,062

6%

64%



160

GOAL
CW G6

Provide equitable opportunity and access to services for all Seattleites.

POLICIES
CW 6.1

Enhance opportunities for people with low-incomes, disabilities, limited English,
cultural barriers, time constraints, transportation limitations, and other barriers to
gain access to services they need.

CW 6.2

Promote culturally responsive and relevant service delivery from City departments
and other agencies, including translation and interpretation services.

CW 6.3

Provide opportunities for, and actively recruit, diverse representation on City boards,
commissions, and advisory committees that contribute to City decision-making.

CW 6.4

Promote respect and appreciation for diversity of ability, age, culture, economic
status, gender identity, national origin, race, religion, and sexual orientation,
including economic, racial, cultural, and individual differences, and support efforts
to achieve diversity throughout the city.

CW 6.5

Promote racial and social justice, human and civil rights, and mutual respect to
reduce intolerance.

CW 6.6

Celebrate the richness of diversity through cultural activities and events that bring
people together to experience ethnic and cultural traditions.

CW 6.7

Support community development activities in areas with low access to opportunity
and high displacement risk.

Coordination of Services
Discussion

The City plays an important role in building human service and public safety systems. These
systems must be culturally responsive, efficient, and accessible to all people. The City contracts with multiple community-based organizations to help develop and deliver high-quality
services to residents across communities. Locating multiple services in neighborhood centers
can make it easier for people to find and use the services they need.
GOAL
CW G7

Develop a flexible, comprehensive, coordinated, and efficient system of human
services that addresses the needs of people, families, and communities.





161

POLICIES
CW 7.1

Encourage cooperative planning, decision-making, and funding for health and
human service delivery throughout the region.

CW 7.2

Join with other public and private institutions in the region to develop a stable and
adequate funding base for services that support safe and healthy communities.

CW 7.3

Strive to disseminate more coordinated information about the availability of
services in the community.

CW 7.4

Develop customer-focused services, using feedback from participants, and involve
consumers in identifying needs and planning for service delivery.

CW 7.5

Consider related issues, such as transportation, access to frequent transit, and the
need for dependent care, when planning for health, human services, employment,
education, and recreation programs.

CW 7.6

Encourage neighborhood organizations to address a broad range of human service
issues to match neighborhood or community strengths and needs, and to identify
solutions that make service delivery more relevant, responsive, accessible, and userfriendly.

CW 7.7

Site new human service facilities in or near urban centers and villages, considering
access to frequent transit, and use good-neighbor guidelines that consider the
needs of consumers and the community.

CW 7.8

Encourage use of existing facilities and collocation of services, including joint
use of schools and City and community facilities, to make services available in
underserved areas and in urban village areas.

CW 7.9

Collaborate with community organizations and other jurisdictions to advocate
for strong health, human service, and public safety systems, including services for
mental health and substance abuse.

CW 7.10 Identify and implement effective ways to measure program performance and
results, balancing accountability and efficiency with the need to encourage service
innovation.





162

Community Involvement

Introduction
The City is committed to community involvement in decision-making processes that affect
community members. City departments use community involvement to create plans, design programs, and guide city investments and policy decisions.
The City benefits from community involvement in many ways:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Better understanding of community values, needs, priorities and differing perspectives;
Local knowledge and expertise of community members are valued and shared;
Improved decision-making leading to better quality plans and projects;
Informed community members understand trade-offs in decision-making;
Enhanced trust and confidence in government;
Increase understanding about the different roles community input can play in the
decision-making process;





163

•
•

More community support for plans and projects; and
More cost efficient and timely implementation.

Inclusive and Equitable Community Involvement
Discussion

Equity is essential to any community involvement process to improve relationships and
outcomes. The City is committed to conducting inclusive and equitable community involvement that effectively reaches a broad range of community members, particularly those
affected by the City’s decisions. Community involvement should reflect Seattle’s commitment to race and social justice, and use practices that are culturally sensitive, responsive
and address barriers to participation of marginalized communities.
GOAL
CI G1

Provide opportunities for inclusive and equitable community involvement.

POLICIES
CI 1.1

Promote racial and social justice, human and civil rights, and mutual respect to
reduce intolerance, and reach out and bring people together in ways that build
bridges between individuals and between groups.

CI 1.2

Create systems that are reflective of and accessible to communities throughout the
city to equitably involve community members in City decision-making.

CI 1.3

Develop well-designed, responsive, culturally-relevant community involvement
plans.

CI 1.4

Build community capacity for meaningful and authentic community involvement,
enhance the ability of community members, including those of marginalized
communities, to develop the knowledge and skills to effectively participate in
planning and decision-making processes.

CI 1.5

Provide a wide range of opportunities for obtaining information and involvement in
decision-making processes.

CI 1.6

Seek greater equity and more meaningful involvement by diverse community
members (homeowners, renters, businesses, employees, property owners,
institutions, youth, seniors, etc.), and especially members of marginalized
communities in decision-making processes.

CI 1.7

Effectively and efficiently manage the use of City and community resources to plan
and implement community involvement.





164

CI 1.8

Partner with other governments, schools, institutions, and community-based
organizations to plan and implement community involvement.

CI 1.9

Seek to reflect of the diversity of the city in the membership of city-appointed
boards and commissions.

Community and Neighborhood Planning
Discussion

Neighborhood
Development
Program
South Seattle
Redevelopment
Project

Historic
Preservation
Plans
Environmental
Planning &
Regulation

Neighborhood
Plans
Downtown
Revitalization Plan

Neighborhood
Plans (33)
Station Areas
Plans

Neighborhood
Plan Updates

NOW

1994 Comp Plan
+ Urban Villages

2000s

Neighborhood
Improvement
Plans

Citywide Planning
for Land Use Code
with remapping

1990s

Model Cities/
Urban Renewal

Urban Renewal
Plans

1980s

1965 Comp Plan

1970s

1960s

Community planning is a specific type of community involvement process that produces plans for particular geographic areas. The City’s approach to community planning
has evolved over time to become more inclusive. The top-down approaches of earlier
decades gave way to a “bottom-up” neighborhood planning process for unique areas,
including “urban villages” and “urban centers” designated in the 1994 Comprehensive
Plan. Between 1995 and 2000 the City funded neighborhood groups to draft goals, policies
and actions that would encourage the pattern and distribution of growth outlined in the
Comprehensive Plan. By 2000 City Council adopted policies and goals for 33 neighborhood
plans (plus five urban center village plans within the Downtown urban center) into the City’s
Comprehensive Plan. In recent years, city staff has initiated planning processes in partnership with many neighborhoods to update neighborhood plans, develop implementation
plans, and address other planning and development issues. Currently, the Neighborhood
Plans section of the Comprehensive Plan contains the goals and policies that have emerged
from different community planning initiatives, these goals and policies are the city’s adopted “Neighborhood Plans.”

Comp Plan Update

Urban Design
Frameworks

OPCD & Integrated
Planning

Neighborhood
Action Plans

Data driven
planning

Hope VI Master
Plans

Equitable
Development

Land Use and Community Planning over time
Community planning continues to evolve as the needs of communities, the city, and the region
change over time. For example, race and social justice has become an important part of planning.
Moving forward, community planning will be an integrated and equitable approach to identify and
implement a community’s vision for how their neighborhood will grow. Plans will reflect the history,
character, and vision of the community but also remain consistent with the overall citywide vision





165

and strategy of the Comprehensive Plan. Creating and implementing community plans can help residents apply this Comprehensive Plan at a local level and can provide more specific guidance than
the citywide policies do for areas where growth and change are occurring or desired. In some cases,
these plans address topics not covered elsewhere in the plan. In other cases, community plans give
local examples for how a citywide policy would best be implement in that neighborhood. The City
will undertake community planning to review and update current neighborhood plans, as well as to
address ongoing and emerging issues.

GOAL
CI G2

Work with a broad range of community members to plan for future homes, jobs,
recreation, transportation options and gathering places in their community.

POLICIES
CI 2.1

Use an inclusive community involvement process in all community planning efforts.

CI 2.2

Undertake community planning that will guide development and public
investments within geographic areas.

CI 2.3

Consider areas with the following characteristics when allocating City resources for
community planning.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

CI 2.4

Areas designated urban centers or villages in the Comprehensive Plan
Areas with high risk of displacement
Areas with low access to opportunity and distressed communities
Areas experiencing significant improvements in transit service
Areas experiencing a growth rate significantly higher or lower than
anticipated in the Comprehensive Plan
Areas identified for multiple capital investments that could benefit from
coordinated planning
Areas experiencing environmental justice concerns including public health or
safety concerns
Areas with outdated community or neighborhood plans that no longer reflect
current conditions, a citywide vision of the Comprehensive Plan, or local
priorities

Encourage transparency in the development and updating of community plans by:
•
•
•

•
•

Establishing a project committee that reflects community diversity;
Creating, with community involvement, a detailed project description with
the purpose of defining the plan, tasks, timeline and anticipated products;
Creating, with the project committee, a community involvement plan
outlining the tools and methods to be used, and how results will be
communicated;
Monitoring implementation of plans over time; and
Providing sufficient funding for each step.





166

CI 2.5

Determine, in collaboration with the community, which of the following topics
should be addressed in a community plan or an update to a community plan:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Land use and zoning
Urban design and community character
Parks and open space
Housing, amenities and services to support a range of incomes and
household types
Transportation, utilities and infrastructure
Economic development
Community services, institutions and facilities
Health
Arts and culture
Climate resilience and adaptation
Emergency preparedness
Community organizational capacity
Equitable development and risk of displacement

CI 2.6

Use an integrated, interdepartmental planning approach to implement community
plan recommendations such as capital improvement projects, affordable housing,
services, zoning and other City investments.

CI 2.7

Collaborate with the community to implement community plans.

CI 2.8

Assess and report on the implementation of community plans periodically.

CI 2.9

Consult with the community to assess and refine implementation priorities as
circumstances change.

CI 2.10

Use outcomes of the community planning process to update the goals and policies
in the Neighborhood Plans section of the Comprehensive Plan.

CI 2.11

Maintain consistency between neighborhood plans and the Comprehensive Plan.
In the event of a possible inconsistency between the Comprehensive Plan and a
neighborhood plan, amend the Comprehensive Plan or the neighborhood plan to
maintain consistency.

CI 2.12

Provide sufficient funding and resources to work with communities to update
community and neighborhood plans to maintain their relevancy and consistancy
with community goals and the citywide policies of the Comprehensive Plan.





167

