Container Port

Introduction
One of the factors behind Seattle's strong economy is the city's role in importing and exporting goods. The Port of Seattle operates one of the largest container-shipping facilities on the West Coast. Not only do the workers who move cargo in and out of the shipping terminals make good wages, but exporting goods made in the Seattle area brings additional money into the regional economy. The Land Use, Transportation, and Economic Development elements of this Plan contain related policies about the importance of these areas and how the City regulates uses and provides critical transportation services to them.

GOAL

CPG1	Maintain viable and thriving import and export activities in the city as a vital component of the city's and the region's economic base.

POLICIES


CP 1.1 Help preserve cargo-container activities by retaining industrial designations on land that supports marine- and rail-related industries, including industrial land adjacent to rail- or water-dependent transportation facilities.



CP1.2 Continue to monitor the land area needs, including those related to expansion of cargo container-related activities, and take action to prevent the loss of land needed to serve these activities.



CPl.3 Discourage nonindustrial land uses, such as retail and residential, in industrially zoned areas to minimize conflicts between uses and to prevent conversion of industrial land in the vicinity of cargo-container terminals or their support facilities.

CP 1.4	Consider how zoning designations may affect the definition of highest and best use, with the goals of maintaining the jobs and revenue that cargo-container activities generate and protecting scarce industrial land supply for cargo-container industries, such as marine- and rail-related industries.

CP 1.5 Consider the value of transition areas—which allow a wider range of uses while not
creating conflicts with preferred cargo-container activities and uses—at the edges of
general industrial zones. In this context, zoning provisions such as locational criteria
and development standards are among the tools for defining such edge areas.
CP 1.6 Monitor, maintain, and improve key freight corridors, networks, and intermodal
connections that provide access to cargo-container facilities and the industrial areas
around them to address bottlenecks and other access constraints.
CP 1.7 Provide safe, reliable, efficient, and direct access between Port marine facilities
and the state highway or interstate system, and between Port terminals and
railroad intermodal facilities, recognizing that Port operations must address other
transportation needs, such as pedestrian safety.
CP 1.8 Make operational, design, access, and capital investments to accommodate trucks
and railroad operations and preserve mobility of goods and services. Improvements
may include improvement of pavement conditions, commute trip reduction
strategies, roadway rechannelization to minimize modal conflicts, use of intelligent
transportation systems, construction of critical facility links, and grade separation
of modes, especially at heavily used railroad crossings.


CP 1.9	Maintain a City classification for freight routes to indicate routes where freight will be the major priority. Street improvements that are consistent with freight mobility but also support other modes may be considered in these streets.

CP 1.10	Identify emerging cargo-container freight transportation issues by working with affected stakeholder groups, including the Seattle Freight Advisory Board. Provide regular opportunities for communication between the City, the freight community, other affected communities, and other agencies and stakeholders.

CP 1.11	Continue joint City and Port efforts to implement relevant Port recommendations, such as recommendations contained in the Container Terminal Access Study.

CP 1.12	Given the importance of cargo container-terminal operations to the state and regional economies, develop partnerships within the City, the Port, the region, and the State to advocate for project prioritization and timely funding to improve and maintain freight infrastructure, and explore funding partnerships.

CP 1.13	Maintain consistency between local, regional, and State freight-related policies.

CP 1.14	Encourage the siting of new businesses that support the goals for cargo-container activities in the City's manufacturing/industrial centers.

CPI.IS Work cooperatively with other agencies to address the effects of major land use and transportation projects to avoid or mitigate construction and operational effects on the cargo container-industry sector.

CP 1.16	Facilitate the creation of coalitions of industrial businesses, vocational training and other educational institutions, and public agencies to help develop training programs to move trained workers into cargo container-related jobs.

CP 1.17	Identify opportunities to achieve economic, community, and environmental benefits from the development and operations of cargo container-related activities, including access to employment for historically excluded populations.

CP 1.18		Form partnerships with nonprofit, community-based, private, and public stakeholders to establish environmental improvement goals, including carbon dioxide emission reductions, stormwater management, redevelopment and cleanup of existing marine industrial properties, sustainable design, and fish- and wildlife-habitat improvements. Develop strategies to achieve these goals that include developing funding mechanisms and legislative support.

CP 1.19	Work with nonprofit, community-based, private, and public stakeholders to formulate plans for public open space, shoreline access, and fish- and wildlife­ habitat improvements that incorporate community needs and area-wide habitat priorities with the need to maintain sufficient existing marine industrial lands for present and anticipated cargo-container needs.


