Introduction

Seattle is a growing city. We use this Comprehensive Pion to manage growth in a way that benefits all of the city's residents and preserves the surrounding natural environment.

Seattle's recent building boom is a reminder of how desirable Seattle is as a place to live and work. Since the Plan was first adopted in 1994, the City has worked to accommodate new people and businesses, while at the same time looking for ways the city can continue to be livable for future generations. Further growth will present challenges and
opportunities similar to the ones we have faced in the recent past. The City has created this Plan as a guide to help it make decisions about managing growth equitably over the next twenty years.

The City in the Region
With the most people and jobs of any city in Washington State, Seattle is the center of the fast-growing Central Puget Sound region. Made up of King, Snohomish, Pierce, and Kitsap Counties, this dynamic metropolitan region expects its population to exceed five million by 2040. Seattle hosts many of the region's largest employers, including the University of Washington and major medical facilities. It also contains cultural attractions such as the Seattle Symphony, the Northwest Folklife Festival, and professional sports teams, and serves as the focal point of the region's multiple transit systems.

Over the past decade, the city has grown rapidly, adding an average of about four thousand housing units and seven thousand people each year. In the years to come, Seattle expects to accommodate a significant share of the region's growth. This Plan contains goals and policies designed to guide growth in a manner that reflects the City's core values and that enhances the quality of life for all.

What Drives This Plan

Seattle's Core Values

Before Seattle's Comprehensive Plan was first drafted in the early 1990s, City staff and the Planning Commission held numerous community meetings, with the intention of inviting more people into the conversation and hearing from groups who hadn't always been at the table. The goal of City staff and the Commission was to identify the values that people
cared most about. The principles that emerged from these conversations came to be known as the core values for the Comprehensive Plan, and they are still valid. This version of the Plan honors the efforts of those past participants and holds the same values at its center.

Race and Social Equity. Seattle believes that every resident should have the opportunity to thrive and to be a part of the city's growing economy. In 2015 the mayor and the City Council adopted a resolution that changed the title of this value from "social equity" to "race and social equity," to emphasize the need to address disparities experienced
by people of color. In 2016, at Council's request, the Office of Planning and Community Development developed the Growth and Equity Analysis. The results of the Growth and Equity Analysis inform elected officials and the public about potential future displacement impacts of the recommended Growth Strategy on marginalized populations; and strategies for mitigating identified impacts and increasing access to opportunity for marginalized populations.

Historically in the city of Seattle and throughout the nation, people have been denied equal access to education, jobs, homes, and neighborhoods because of their race, class, disabilities, or other real or perceived differences. While such practices are now illegal, some groups still do not enjoy access to the same job opportunities, security, and freedoms that other Seattle residents have. The benefits and burdens of growth are not distributed equitably.

Seattle has not yet achieved social equity for all who live and work in our city, and statistics have shown that this is particularly true for people of color.

These inequities have become more significant as the makeup of Seattle's population has changed. The city has gone from being 25 percent people of color in 1990 to 34 percent
in 2010, and this trend is expected to continue. More immigrants will arrive, and minority populations will continue to grow through natural increase. The map on the following page shows locations in the city where there are concentrations of people of color.

L Photo(c) John Skelton R Photo(c) Briana N, Youth in Focus student


With more people moving into the city, property values could increase or existing buildings and homes could be replaced with new and more expensive ones. Changes like these will affect some communities more than others and could make it more difficult for residents or businesses to remain in their current neighborhoods, especially in low-income areas. In
some cases these outcomes are unavoidable, but the City must try to help existing residents and businesses remain part of our growing and changing community.

2010 Population
by major racial category and Hispanic/Latino ethnicity
One dot equals five people.
  Asian
  Black/African American
  White
Hispanic/Latino (any race)


Since the early 2000s, the City has worked to implement a race and social justice initiative, a citywide effort to make racial equity a reality. This version of the Comprehensive Plan marks a renewed and strengthened commitment to that goal.

The main goal of the Comprehensive Plan is to guide the physical development of the city. However, in shaping how we create new spaces for people to live, work, and play, this Plan also aims to give all Seattle residents better access to jobs, education, affordable housing, parks, community centers, and healthy food.

In 2016, the City published a report titled Growth and Equity. That report compiles data about several economic and demographic factors that help identify places in the city where residents, especially people of color and low-income residents, could be at risk of displacement or where there is less access to employment and other opportunities. The City used information from this report to shape this Plan's preferred pattern of growth, as described in the Growth Strategy Element. The City will continue to monitor the conditions contained in the report.

The goals and policies in this Plan can also influence the actions of other government agencies and private businesses to promote social justice and racial equity. Working toward equity will help produce stronger and more resilient economic growth-growth that bene  fits everyone.

The discussions that introduce sections of this Plan highlight other facts about some conditions or services as they relate to the income or racial characteristics of people in Seattle.

Environmental Stewardship. Even as the city becomes increasingly urban, Seattle is dedicated to protecting and restoring the green spaces and water that make our city special.
Between the time the Plan was first adopted and 2015, Seattle has accommodated more

than its expected share of countywide residential growth-adding more than sixty-seven thousand new housing units, compared to the original Plan's estimate of fifty thousand to sixty thousand. This has helped reduce the proportion of countywide housing growth in rural areas from about 15 percent in the 1980s to less than 2 percent in recent years. By taking on a significant share of the region's growth, Seattle has helped protect rural farms
and forests from development. And by concentrating growth in urban villages, we help pre  serve the existing green areas in the city, including the areas that now contain low-density development.

The City has committed to make Seattle carbon neutral by the year 2050 in order to reduce the threat of climate change. To reach this ambitious and important goal, local government, businesses, and residents will need to work together. Seattle's Climate Action Plan provides long-term planning direction and guidance for climate protection and adaptation efforts through 2030. This Plan contains consistent goals and policies to help guide this effort. For instance, the Growth Strategy and Transportation elements promote development that will make walking, biking, and public transit viable options for more people so that they can be less reliant on automobiles-a major source of carbon emissions in this region. Seattle charged the 2012 Green Ribbon Commission to help create a climate action plan that increases the circle of economic prosperity, affordable housing, public health, and social equity while protecting our planet for future generations. Seattle's Climate Action Plan provides long-term planning direction and guidance for climate protection and adaptation efforts through 2030.

Community. Seattle is made up of many small communities, where people bond because of shared interests or backgrounds. Each of the small communities is a crucial part of the whole, and all the communities working together is what makes the larger Seattle community thrive.

To prepare this Plan and previous versions of it, hundreds of people participated in meetings, filled out comment forms, and wrote e-mails and letters to the City. Among the diverse groups of people who call Seattle home, there were many different-and often competing interests and perspectives. Yet there was one goal in common: to make Seattle the best
city for living, working, and raising families. This Plan encourages continued broad public participation in decisions that affect all aspects of the city.

Economic Opportunity and Security. Seattle recovered from the great recession and grew beyond 2008's high employment levels, and by 2014 the city contained 514,700 jobs. Boeing and Amazon have been major contributors to that employment growth, but other, smaller businesses have also provided new jobs.

For businesses to thrive, they need skilled employees and space to grow. For specific examples of how this Plan addresses economic opportunity, look in the Growth Strategy and Land Use elements. These elements include policies that identify locations for employment

growth and give ideas for how to direct growth there. The Economic Development element encourages businesses to put down roots and expand, while the Community Well-Being element talks about helping people get the kind of education and skills they will need to fill the newly created jobs.

Sometimes, just having a job isn't enough. Even when employed, many people may not be able to afford to live in the city. Through this Plan, the City demonstrates its commitment to promoting livable wages and giving people equal opportunities. The City has also developed programs to help address continuing racial disparities in education and employment.


Photo(c) John Skelton

Sustainability

The Plan has been guided by the principle of sustainability. One definition of sustainable development is "development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs." This Plan presents ways to sustain the natural environment by directing more urban growth into Seattle in order to preserve forests and farmlands outside the city. The concept of sustainability also applies to the urban environment, where the City uses its funds efficiently by limiting the number of places


where it encourages significant growth. This principle is still an important guide to how the Plan is written and how it will be implemented.

Washington's Growth Management Act

The state Growth Management Act (GMA), enacted in 1990, requires counties and larger cities to create comprehensive plans and update those plans regularly. The GMA's goals include reducing sprawl and directing growth to areas that already have water, sewer, transportation, and other urban services. The GMA calls on each county to draw what is called an urban-growth boundary. Urban-style development is not allowed outside that boundary.
Comprehensive plans must show that each city has enough land with the right zoning to absorb the growth that is expected to occur over the next twenty years. Cities must also plan for the housing, transportation, water, sewer, and other facilities that will be needed. The GMA requires that plans be consistent with other plans in the region. In this region, other plans include Vision 2040 and the King County Countywide Planning Policies.

Vision 2040

The Puget Sound Regional Council (PSRC) is the regional growth management, transportation, and economic development organization covering King, Snohomish, Pierce, and Kitsap Counties. It is governed by elected officials from across the region. Together these officials have created a regional growth strategy called Vision 2040, which recommends that new jobs and residents should be directed to designated centers connected with high-capacity transit. Seattle's Plan identifies six regional growth centers and two manufacturing/ industrial centers that are recognized in the regional plan. Consistent with the regional growth strategy, the Plan contains housing- and job-growth targets for each of those centers. Vision 2040 also assumes a distribution of growth across the Puget Sound region, with especially large shares of growth going to the five metropolitan cities-Seattle, Bellevue, Everett, Tacoma, and Bremerton. This Plan reflects Seattle's commitment to accommodate its share of growth as the metropolitan city at the heart of the region.

The PSRC often describes Vision 2040 as enhancing people, the planet, and prosperity. This Plan addresses those same aspects of growth through policies that renew the emphasis
on race and social equity, draw growth to areas of the city where public facilities exist, set rules for protecting environmentally critical areas, promote nonautomobile travel, attract diverse job growth, focus on education and job training to help people participate in the region's economy, and provide affordable housing through a number of local tools.

The PSRC brought together representatives from local governments and the private sector to develop guidelines for how to plan for areas around light rail stations. The result was the Growing Transit Communities Regional Compact, a regional agreement that proposed
ways to make sure that everyone, including lower-income people and communities of color, would benefit from the new transit system and other improvements that occur around it.

King County Countywide Planning Policies

In King County, the Growth Management Planning Council is made up of elected officials representing all the jurisdictions. They have worked together to develop the Countywide Planning Policies (CPPs), which provide guidance for the comprehensive plans that the cities in King County must adopt. The CPPs contain twenty-year housing- and job-growth targets for each jurisdiction. Those targets are what this Plan is designed to address. The CPPs also address the need for affordable housing in the county, for local action to address climate change, and for growing in ways that will create healthy communities.

Seattle's Urban Village Strategy

The foundation of Seattle's Comprehensive Plan is the urban village strategy. It is the City's unique approach to meeting the state GMA requirement, and it is similar to Vision 2040's growth centers approach. This strategy encourages most future job and housing growth to occur in specific areas in the city that are best able to absorb and capitalize on that growth. These are also the best places for efficiently providing essential public services and making amenities available to residents. These areas include designated urban centers, such as Downtown and the five others (First Hill/Capitol Hill, South Lake Union, Uptown, University District, and Northgate) recognized in the regional plan. In addition, this Plan designates twenty-four urban villages throughout the city. Both urban centers and urban villages are places that already have active business districts and concentrations of housing. The urban village strategy

accommodates Seattle's expected growth in on orderly and predictable way; strengthens existing business districts;
promotes the most efficient use of public investments, now and in the future; encourages more walking, bicycling, and transit use; and
retains the character of less dense residential neighborhoods outside of urban villages.


By encouraging both business and housing growth in the urban centers and urban villages, the Plan makes it possible for more people to live near job opportunities and near services that can meet their everyday needs. In this way, more people are able to walk or bike to some of their daily activities, leading to more activity on the sidewalks and fewer vehicles on the streets, and making these communities more vibrant. The urban village strategy also puts more people near transit service so that they can more easily use buses or light rail to get to other job centers, shopping, or entertainment. This access is useful for all residents, but particularly those with limited incomes or physical limitations that make them reliant on public transit.

 
L Photo(c) Mackenzie M, Youth in Focus student. R Photo(c) John Skelton

The urban village strategy puts into practice the regional growth center concept called for in regional plans, but at a more local scale. In addition to the regionally recognized urban centers, the Plan identifies two categories of urban villages, each intended to combine housing with employment opportunities, shops, and services, all in compact environments that encourage walking. The Plan identifies six hub urban villages where a fair amount of housing and employment growth should occur, though at lower densities than in the centers. It also identifies eighteen residential urban villages scattered around the city where modest housing growth should occur near retailers and services that mainly serve the nearby population.

All of the urban centers and villages identified in the Plan function the way the regional plans anticipate: as compact, pedestrian-friendly areas that offer different mixes of office, commercial, civic, entertainment, and residential uses, but at scales that respect Seattle's character and development pattern.

The urban village strategy has been successful in achieving its purposes over the twenty-some years it has been in place. During that time, over 75 percent of the city's new housing and new jobs were located inside the urban centers and villages that together make up only about 17 percent of the city's total land area. (See the map on the following page.) More than half of the housing growth occurred in the six urban centers.

More of the urban villages are thriving now than in 1994, when the strategy was first adopt  ed. Columbia City, Ballard, and Madison/Miller are just a few of the neighborhoods where

Housing Units Built 1995-2014













2-5
  6-10
  11 -20
  21 -50
  51 -100
100+	 
Urban Center

..	Hub Urban Village Residential Urban Village
..	 Manufacturing/ Industrial Center

..	Remainder of the City
 

added residents and new businesses have meant more people out on the sidewalks, enjoying their communities and raising the overall vitality of each area. The villages continue to provide new services and goods for residents in nearby areas, and this means that community members have less distance to travel to get what they need and want. However, the long-sought prosperity in these communities has sometimes come at the cost of changing the character of the neighborhoods and forcing some former residents and businesses to leave. Those who left were often lower-income households, whose housing was replaced by more expensive new buildings or who could not afford the rising rents brought on by the neighborhood changes. In defining the future success of the urban village strategy, the City will try to plan ways for the urban villages to include opportunities for marginalized populations to remain in the city and to access education and affordable housing.

In many of the urban villages, ridership on King County Metro buses has outpaced the population growth, and several of these villages have benefited from the light rail service that first opened in 2009, providing another option for traveling without a car.

Of course, urban villages are more than just the fulfillment of the regional growth strategy; they are neighborhoods where Seattle residents live, work, learn, shop, play, and socialize. After initial adoption of the Plan, the City engaged in a citywide neighborhood-planning effort that produced a neighborhood plan for each area of the city containing an urban center or urban village. Those neighborhood plans found some common themes for improvement among the different communities and also highlighted some needs that were unique to each of those neighborhoods. To address the common themes, voters approved funding for libraries, open spaces, community centers, and transit. Since the neighborhood plans were first adopted, the City has worked with communities to refine more than half of those plans and help take action to accomplish the goals that each community prioritized.

Seattle 2035
Forecasts suggest that over the next twenty years, Seattle will need to accommodate 70,000 additional housing units, 120,000 more residents, and 115,000 additional jobs. This updated version of the Plan builds on the success of the urban village strategy to encourage that growth to occur in a manner that works for all of the city's people. Most urban centers and villages have continued to grow rapidly during the recent building boom, and current zoning allows them to handle even more growth. The City expects that between now and 2035, most housing and employment growth will occur in those urban centers and villages.

In addition, light rail service in Seattle now provides certain areas of the city with more frequent and reliable transit connections to a greater number of locations. Light rail already connects the University of Washington, Capitol Hill, Downtown, Southeast Seattle neighborhoods, and the airport. By 2021 it will reach Roosevelt and Northgate, and by 2023, it will stretch to Lynnwood and the Eastside. By 2035, there could be even more light rail lines in the city.

In 2014, voters in Seattle approved a levy that funds additional Metro bus service in the city. This increased transit service represents major investments and commitment to many Seattle neighborhoods, and is an opportunity that Seattle should not waste. To leverage this investment to the fullest extent, the Plan calls for focusing more growth in areas within a ten-minute walk of light rail stations and in locations with very good bus service.

As mentioned above, the City has committed to be carbon neutral by the year 2050. This Plan spans a critical time for the City in meeting that goal, and it provides some of the direction necessary to assist the City in achieving it.

Who We Are Planning For

This Plan is for the people who live in, work in, and visit Seattle today. It is also for those who will make up the community of Seattle in the future-not only our children but also the newcomers who will arrive for education or job opportunities and who will value the urban and natural features of Seattle as much as we do.

While we have an idea of how many new housing units and jobs the City should expect over the next twenty years, it is harder to know more specific information about the ages, in  comes, and family structures of those future residents and workers, and to get a real picture of who our new neighbors might be.

The US Census and other sources give us a good description of the city's current population and information about recent trends that help offer a general picture of the future population.

Seattle's population in 2016 is estimated to be 686,800, and growth over the next twenty years will add about 120,000 people to that total. Seattle's population is younger than the population in the surrounding region, with a higher percentage of twenty-somethings in the city than in King County as a whole. However, Seattle has a much lower percentage of people below the age of eighteen than does the rest of King County. In fact, Seattle's percentage of households containing children is one of the lowest among large cities in the United States. The age differences in Seattle households are even more dramatic in urban centers.

The average number of people living in a household in Seattle (2.06) is also lower than in King County (2.39). Seattle's household size has been decreasing since the 1960s, but the rate of that decrease has slowed in the past twenty years. Household size could continue to decline slowly in the future.

Just as Seattle's current population is younger than that of the surrounding areas, Seattle's older population is growing at a slower rate than that of other parts of King County. Still, in the future, we can expect that there will be more seniors living in the city than there are today, as the baby boom generation ages.

2010 percentages of population by age and gender

Seattle is becoming more racially and culturally diverse. 2014 estimates from the American Community Survey indicate that almost a fifth of Seattle residents were born in another country and that close to a quarter of residents speak a language other than English at home. The Seattle school district reports that among all of its students, 120 languages
are spoken. The growing diversity in the city's population poses new challenges for City departments and other institutions as they strive to meet the needs of all residents. It also provides an opportunity to benefit from the cultures and skills of the people who make up these groups.

This Plan provides policy direction for locating new housing units and encourages a variety of housing types that can help meet the needs of diverse households who may be looking for studios, larger apartments, town houses, highrise apartments, or detached houses. By planning for more transportation choices, including bicycles and transit, the Plan will shape a city attractive to many potential future residents. This can include today's twenty-somethings who choose to remain in the city as they begin to have families, aging residents hoping to grow old in the place they've called home, and those who rely on transit for getting around. At the same time, the Plan's policies can make the city attractive to those critical businesses that provide jobs and services for Seattle residents.

Defining and Measuring Success

This Plan specifically covers the next twenty years of growth in Seattle, but the city is expect  ed to continue growing beyond that time period. There will always be ways the city can improve to meet changing needs and to address ongoing concerns. Because of the changing nature of our region and our city, the success of this Plan is not measured by an ideal

end state. Instead, success is measured by whether we are moving in the directions the Plan lays out.

The Plan covers many topics in several chapters, and monitoring progress on every one of those topics would be a time-consuming and demanding task. To simplify the monitoring process, the City has identified several indicators that will provide insights about progress on key issues addressed by the Plan. The City will collect baseline data and track these indicators over time. Indicators will be tracked for the city as a whole and for each urban village as feasible to help assess progress in implementing the Growth Strategy. The City will report regularly on changes in these indicators to help the public and elected officials judge the effectiveness of the Plan and the City's actions to implement it. These indicators include:

the number of new housing units;
the number of demolished housing units; the number of jobs;
the number of income- and rent-restricted affordable housing units; access to frequent transit service;
presence of sidewalks;
the number of households with access to open space;
City infrastructure investment; and housing costs.

In addition to monitoring the items listed above, the City will use other indicators to help gauge how well it is doing in making the city a more equitable place. This set of indica  tors will help show where in the city marginalized populations are at higher risk of being displaced by development; it will also include measures of housing affordability and other long term equitable development outcomes.

Demographics, including age, race and ethnicity, and household composition will be report  ed as part of these monitoring efforts, and information on household income levels will be included along with the equitable development indicators.

Developing and Updating This Plan

Seattle first adopted this Comprehensive Plan in 1994 after a multiyear effort during which residents throughout the city considered ways to shape the future of the city and to accommodate expected growth. Advisory committees, as well as public meetings and events, helped validate the urban village strategy.

The process that produced this current version of the Plan also involved much consultation with the public through a variety of meetings, events, and online conversations.

The GMA limits the City to amending the Plan only once each year, with exceptions for certain types of amendments that can be considered at any time, such as adoption of a new neighborhood plan or incorporation of the Shoreline Master Program. Since the Plan was first adopted, the City has amended it every year through a regular process that is defined in a City Council resolution. State law requires that the City review and update the Plan every eight years.

Application and Implementation of the Plan
The principal purpose of this Comprehensive Plan is to provide policies that guide the development of the city in the context of regional growth management. Community members and officials from all levels of government can look to these policies when planning for growth. The City will use the Plan to help make decisions about proposed ordinances, capital budgets, policies, and programs. Although the City will use the Plan to direct the development of regulations that govern land use and development, it will not use the Plan to review applications for specific development projects, except when an applicable development regulation expressly requires reference to this Comprehensive Plan.

Each element of this Plan generally presents goals followed by policies related to those goals and may also include a discussion about the goals and policies. Some chapters also have appendices. Each of these components is defined as follows.

Goals represent the results that the City hopes to realize over time, perhaps within the twenty-year life of the Plan, except where interim time periods are stated. Whether ex  pressed in terms of numbers or only as directions for future change, goals are aspirations, not guarantees or mandates.

Policies should be read as if preceded by the words It is the City's general policy to. A policy helps to guide the creation of or changes to specific rules or strategies (such as development regulations, budgets, or program plans). City officials will generally make decisions on specific City actions by following ordinances, resolutions, budgets, or program plans that themselves reflect relevant Plan policies, rather than by referring directly to this Plan. Implementation of most policies involves a range of actions over time, so one cannot sim  ply ask whether a specific action or project would fulfill a particular Plan policy. For exam  ple, a policy that states that the City will give priority to a particular need indicates that the City will treat the need as important, not that it will take precedence in every City decision.

Some policies use the words shall, should, ensure, encourage, and so forth. In general, such words describe the emphasis that the policy places on the action but do not necessarily establish a specific legal duty to perform a particular act, to undertake a program or project, or to achieve a specific result.

Some policies may appear to conflict with each other, particularly in the context of a specific situation or when viewed from the perspectives of people whose interests may conflict with a given policy. A classic example is the often-referenced "conflict" between policies calling for preservation of the environment and policies that promote economic development. Because Plan policies do not exist in isolation and must be viewed in the context of all potentially relevant policies, it is largely in applying these policies that the interests are reconciled and balanced by the legislative and executive branches of City government.

In the event that a conflict arises between another City policy and this Plan, the Plan will generally prevail.

Discussions are provided to explain the context in which decisions on goals and policies have been made, the reasons for those decisions, and how the goals and policies are related. The discussion portions of the Plan do not establish or modify policies; rather, they are intended to help explain or interpret policies.

Appendices to the Plan contain certain maps, inventories, and other information required by the GMA, and, in some cases, provide further data and discussion or analysis. The appendices are not to be read as establishing or modifying policies or requirements unless specified for such purposes in the Plan policies. For example, descriptions of current programs in an appendix do not require that these programs be continued, and detailed estimates
of how the City may expect to achieve certain goals do not establish additional goals or requirements.

Implementing the Plan

The City carries the Plan forward through development regulations, functional plans, and investments. For instance, the City's Land Use Code is a compilation of development
regulations that guide how land in the city can be used. The Land Use element of this Plan provides the general direction for regulations that appear in the Land Use Code. Similarly, the Transportation element of this Plan provides direction for the Bicycle Master Plan and Transit Master Plan, which help implement the Plan's transportation policies. The illustration on the next page shows the relationship among various City plans, this Plan, and regional plans.

While the City adopts regulations and plans for the various functions it performs, the private sector and other government agencies also help shape the city in significant ways. For example, the private sector builds most of the new housing and commercial space in the city, King County provides bus service, Sound Transit builds and provides light rail ser-
vice, the school district builds and operates schools, the Port of Seattle operates shipping terminals that bring international trade to the city and the region, and the Washington State Department of Transportation builds and maintains state highways in the city. The City partners with these agencies to help them make decisions that best serve the City's goals.

Implementation of this Plan is therefore a broadly shared effort that relies on the continued involvement of many individuals and institutions in the city and the region.

Growth Management Act

         Statewide Goals/Policies Guidance for Citywide Comprehensive Plans


PSRC Vision 2040
        Regional Growth Goals Regional Framework for Local Decisions
Multi-County Planning Policies


King County Planning Policies
Countywide Goals/Policies Countywide Growth Management


Seattle Comprehensive Plan
Citywide Goals/Policies Neighborhood Goals/Policies Six-Year Capital Investment Plan

Implementation Tools


Examples of Implementing Plans
Pedestrian Master Plan Bicycle Master Plan Transit Master Plan Freight Master Plan Move Seattle Action Plan Consolidated Plan for Housing and Community Development
Parks Legacy Plan SPU Stormwater Management Plan SPU Solid Waste Plan
City Light Strategic Pian My Library Strategic Plan Climate Action Plan Disaster Recovery Framework

Examples of Codes & Rules in Seattle Municipal Code
Land Use Code Stormwater Code Environmentally Critical Areas (ECA) Code Historic Preservation Environmental Protection Street and Sidewalk Use Parks and Recreation

Examples of Programs &
Initiatives
Move Seattle Levy Housing Levy Seattle Park District Seattle Homeowner
Stabilization Program Multifamily Property Tax Exemption (MFTE) Credit Program
Neighborhood Matching Fund
City Light Appliance Rebate Program Public Art Program Green Stormwater
Infrastructure Program Fire and Emergency Response Levy
Food Action Plan














