Community Involvement

Introduction
The City is committed to community involvement in decision-making processes that affect community members. City departments use community involvement to create plans, design programs, and guide city investments and policy decisions.

The City benefits from community involvement in many ways:

Better understanding of community values, needs, priorities and differing perspectives; Local knowledge and expertise of community members ore valued and shored; Improved decision-making leading to better quality plans and projects;
Informed community members understand trade-offs in decision-making; Enhanced trust and confidence in government;
Increase understanding about the different roles community input con ploy in the decision-making process;

More community support for plans and projects; and More cost efficient and timely implementation.


Inclusive and Equitable Community Involvement

Discussion

Equity is essential to any community involvement process to improve relationships and outcomes. The City is committed to conducting inclusive and equitable community involvement that effectively reaches a broad range of community members, particularly those affected by the City's decisions. Community involvement should reflect Seattle's commitment to race and social justice, and use practices that are culturally sensitive, responsive and address barriers to participation of marginalized communities.



GOAL

CI G1	Provide opportunities for inclusive and equitable community involvement.


POLICIES


CI 1.1 Promote racial and social justice, human and civil rights, and mutual respect to
reduce intolerance, and reach out and bring people together in ways that build
bridges between individuals and between groups.
CI 1.2 Create systems that are reflective of and accessible to communities throughout the
city to equitably involve community members in City decision-making.
CI 1.3 Develop well-designed, responsive, culturally-relevant community involvement
plans.
CI 1.4 Build community capacity for meaningful and authentic community involvement,
enhance the ability of community members, including those of marginalized
communities, to develop the knowledge and skills to effectively participate in
planning and decision-making processes.
CI 1.5 Provide a wide range of opportunities for obtaining information and involvement in
decision-making processes.
CI 1.6 Seek greater equity and more meaningful involvement by diverse community
members (homeowners, renters, businesses, employees, property owners,
institutions, youth, seniors, etc.), and especially members of marginalized
communities in decision-making processes.
CI 1.7 Effectively and efficiently manage the use of City and community resources to plan
and implement community involvement.

Cl1.8 Partner with other governments, schools, institutions, and community-based organizations to plan and implement community involvement.

Cll.9 Seek to reflect of the diversity of the city in the membership of city-appointed boards and commissions.


Community and Neighborhood Planning

Discussion

Community planning is a specific type of community involvement process that produces plans for particular geographic areas. The City's approach to community planning has evolved over time to become more inclusive. The top-down approaches of earlier decades gave way to a "bottom-up" neighborhood planning process for unique areas, including "urban villages" and "urban centers" designated in the 1994 Comprehensive
Plan. Between 1995 and 2000 the City funded neighborhood groups to draft goals, policies and actions that would encourage the pattern and distribution of growth outlined in the Comprehensive Plan. By 2000 City Council adopted policies and goals for 33 neighborhood plans (plus five urban center village plans within the Downtown urban center) into the City's Comprehensive Plan. In recent years, city staff has initiated planning processes in partnership with many neighborhoods to update neighborhood plans, develop implementation plans, and address other planning and development issues. Currently, the Neighborhood Plans section of the Comprehensive Plan contains the goals and policies that have emerged from different community planning initiatives, these goals and policies are the city's adopted "Neighborhood Plans."

1960s
1965 Comp Plan
Model Cities/
Urban Renewal
Neighborhood
Development
Program
South Seattle
Redevelopment
Project
1970s
Urban Renewal
Plans
Neighborhood
Improvement
Plans
Historic
Preservation
Plans
Environmental
Planning &
Regulation
1980s
Citywide Planning
for Land Use Code
with remapping
Neighborhood
Plans
Downtown
Revitalization Plan
1990s
1994 Comp Plan
+ Urban Villages
Neighborhood
Plans (33)
Station Areas
Plans
Hope VI Master
Plans
2000s
Neighborhood
Plan Updates
Urban Design
Frameworks
Neighborhood
Action Plans
NOW
Seattle 2035
Comp Plan Update
OPCD & Integrated
Planning
Data driven
planning
Equitable
Development
Land Use and Community Planning over time

Community planning continues to evolve as the needs of communities, the city, and the region change over time. For example, race and social justice has become an important part of planning. Moving forward, community planning will be an integrated and equitable approach to identify and implement a community's vision for how their neighborhood will grow. Plans will reflect the history, character, and vision of the community but also remain consistent with the overall citywide vision

and strategy of the Comprehensive Plan. Creating and implementing community plans can help residents apply this Comprehensive Plan at a local level and can provide more specific guidance than the citywide policies do for areas where growth and change are occurring or desired. In some cases, these plans address topics not covered elsewhere in the plan. In other cases, community plans give local examples for how a citywide policy would best be implement in that neighborhood. The City will undertake community planning to review and update current neighborhood plans, as well as to address ongoing and emerging issues.

GOAL

CI G2 Work with a broad range of community members to plan for future homes, jobs, recreation, transportation options and gathering places in their community.


POLICIES


CI 2.1 Use an inclusive community involvement process in all community planning efforts.
CI 2.2 Undertake community planning that will guide development and public
investments within geographic areas.
CI 2.3 Consider areas with the following characteristics when allocating City resources for
community planning.
Areas designated urban centers or villages in the Comprehensive Plan
Areas with high risk of displacement
Areas with low access to opportunity and distressed communities
Areas experiencing significant improvements in transit service
Areas experiencing a growth rate significantly higher or lower than
anticipated in the Comprehensive Plan
Areas identified for multiple capital investments that could benefit from
coordinated planning
Areas experiencing environmental justice concerns including public health or
safety concerns
Areas with outdated community or neighborhood plans that no longer reflect
current conditions, a citywide vision of the Comprehensive Plan, or local
priorities
CI 2.4 Encourage transparency in the development and updating of community plans by:
Establishing a project committee that reflects community diversity;
Creating, with community involvement, a detailed project description with
the purpose of defining the plan, tasks, timeline and anticipated products;
Creating, with the project committee, a community involvement plan
outlining the tools and methods to be used, and how results will be
communicated;
Monitoring implementation of plans over time; and
Providing sufficient funding for each step.
CI 2.5 Determine, in collaboration with the community, which of the following topics
should be addressed in a community plan or an update to a community plan:
Land use and zoning
Urban design and community character
Parks and open space
Housing, amenities and services to support a range of incomes and
household types
Transportation, utilities and infrastructure
Economic development
Community services, institutions and facilities
Health
Arts and culture
Climate resilience and adaptation
Emergency preparedness
Community organizational capacity
Equitable development and risk of displacement
CI 2.6 Use an integrated, interdepartmental planning approach to implement community
plan recommendations such as capital improvement projects, affordable housing,
services, zoning and other City investments.
CI 2.7 Collaborate with the community to implement community plans.
CI 2.8 Assess and report on the implementation of community plans periodically.
CI 2.9 Consult with the community to assess and refine implementation priorities as
circumstances change.
CI 2.10 Use outcomes of the community planning process to update the goals and policies
in the Neighborhood Plans section of the Comprehensive Plan.
CI 2.11 Maintain consistency between neighborhood plans and the Comprehensive Plan.
In the event of a possible inconsistency between the Comprehensive Plan and a
neighborhood plan, amend the Comprehensive Plan or the neighborhood plan to
maintain consistency.
CI 2.12 Provide sufficient funding and resources to work with communities to update
community and neighborhood plans to maintain their relevancy and consistancy
with community goals and the citywide policies of the Comprehensive Plan.

