Shoreline Areas

Introduction
Land near the City's major water bodies-Puget Sound, Lake Washington, Lake Union, the Lake Washington Ship Canal, and the Duwamish River-has special importance to the city, its residents, and its businesses. These areas are covered by the State Shoreline Management Act. The City has adopted the Seattle Shoreline Master Program to describe
the rules that govern the functions allowed in shoreline areas. Some businesses-like cargo terminals and boat repair-need to be right on the water. Shoreline areas also provide space for recreation, public access and viewing, and natural areas. This element of the Plan guides how the City will set rules for the development that goes in the city's shoreline areas. Together with the Shoreline Master Program regulations in the City's Land Use Code, maps of the locations of shoreline environments, and the Shoreline Restoration and Enhancement Plan, these policies constitute the Seattle Shoreline Master Program. Because these policies were originally adopted through a separate process, they use a slightly different numbering system than the rest of the Plan.

Shoreline Use


GOALS
SA G1 Encourage shoreline uses that result in long-term over short-term benefit.
SA G2 Define appropriate uses for specific segments of the shoreline.
SA G3 Locate uses that are not water dependent or water related on upland lots to
optimize shoreline use and access.
SA G4 Protect ecological function of those areas of shoreline that are biologically
significant or that are geologically fragile.
SA G5 Restore and enhance ecological function through nonregulatory programs and
policies.

POLICIES

SA Pl	Allow only those uses, developments, and shoreline modifications that retain options for future generations, unless identified benefits clearly outweigh the physical, social, environmental, and economic loss over a twenty-year planning horizon. Use preference will be given in the following order:

1. On waterfront lots:

a. Uses that protect or restore and enhance natural areas and ecological processes and functions, particularly those areas or systems identified as containing or having unique geological, ecological, or biological significance.

b. Water-dependent uses-uses that cannot exist outside a waterfront location and are dependent on the water by reason of the intrinsic nature of operations.

c. Water-related uses-uses or portions of uses not intrinsically dependent on a waterfront location but whose economic viability is dependent upon a location in the shoreline district because

i. the use has a functional requirement for a waterfront location, such as the arrival or shipment of materials by water (a substantial portion of up to 50 percent of its product or materials arrive by vessel), or the need for large quantities of water in the use;

ii. material is stored that is transported by a vessel and is either loaded or off-loaded in the shoreline district; or

iii. the use provides a necessary service supportive of water-dependent uses, and the proximity of the use to its customers makes its services less expensive and/or more convenient.

d. Water-enjoyment uses-those uses that facilitate public access to the shoreline as a primary characteristic of the use; or uses that provide for recreational use or aesthetic enjoyment of the shoreline for a substantial number of people as a general characteristic of the uses
and which, through location, design, and operation, ensure the public's ability to enjoy the physical and aesthetic qualities of the shoreline.
In order to qualify as a water-enjoyment use, the use must be open to the general public, and the shoreline-oriented space within the project must be devoted to the specific aspects of the use that foster shoreline enjoyment.

e. Floating home uses existing as of January 2011, which are considered conforming preferred uses because of their historic role and legal recognition by the City. The intent of this policy is to recognize the existing floating home community in Lake Union and Portage Bay, while protecting natural areas, preserving public access to the shoreline, and preventing the displacement of water-dependent
commercial and manufacturing uses by new floating homes. Applicable development and Shoreline Master Program regulations may impose only reasonable conditions and mitigation that will not effectively preclude maintenance, repair, replacement, and remodeling of existing floating homes and floating home moorages by rendering these actions impracticable.

f. Single-family residential uses-these are preferred uses when they are appropriately located and can be developed without significant impact to ecological functions or displacement of water-dependent uses.

g. Uses that are not water dependent with regulated public access or with ecological restoration and enhancement.

h. Uses that are not water-dependent, water-related, or water-enjoyment uses as defined above, without regulated public access or ecological restoration and enhancement.

2. On upland lots: preferred uses are those that complement uses on adjacent waterfront lots.

3. The preference for protection of the ecological conditions of the shoreline shall be accomplished by prohibiting uses that would negatively impact natural areas, by providing mitigation for negative impacts caused by the use and by providing restoration and enhancement of natural areas where they are degraded.

4. Preferred uses will vary according to the purpose of the shoreline environment.

a. Where the purpose of the environment is to encourage water-dependent and water-related uses, these uses shall be preferred by prohibiting and/ or restricting the number of uses that are not water dependent or water related allowed on waterfront lots.

b. Where the purpose of the environment is to provide public access, these uses shall be preferred by allowing uses that provide public access.

c. Where the purpose of the environment is to protect ecological processes and functions, uses that achieve this purpose shall be preferred.

SAP2


In the Land Use Code, identify appropriate shoreline uses and related standards, and provide site-development standards and other appropriate criteria indicating minimal acceptable standards to be achieved.


SA P3	Allow people to live aboard vessels in moorage areas, and provide standards that mitigate the impacts of live-aboard uses on the shoreline environment.

SA P4	Allow a wider range of uses on upland lots than on waterfront lots in order to support water-dependent and water-related uses on waterfront lots, while avoiding potential incompatibility with those uses.



Shoreline Access


GOALS

SA GG	Maximize public access-both physical and visual-to Seattle's shorelines.

SA G7	Preserve and enhance views of the shoreline and water from upland areas, where appropriate.


POLICIES


SA P5 Enable opportunities for substantial numbers of people to enjoy the shorelines
by requiring access to public property located on the water and by allowing uses
that are not water dependent to locate on waterfront lots when those uses provide
additional public access to the shoreline and are located in waterfront areas less
suited for water-dependent uses.
SA P6 Promote public enjoyment of the shorelines through public-access standards that
require improvements to be safe, be well-designed, and have adequate access to
the water.
SA P7 Encourage adopt-a-beach and other programs that promote voluntary maintenance
of public-access areas in the shoreline district.
SA P8 Maintain standards and criteria for providing public access, except for lots
developed for single-family residences, to achieve the following:
1. Linkages between shoreline public facilities via trails, paths, etc. that connect
boating and other recreational facilities
2. Visible signage at all publicly owned or controlled shorelines and all required
public access on private property

3. Development of bonuses or incentives for the establishment of public access on private property, if appropriate

4. Provision of public-access opportunities by public agencies such as the City, Port of Seattle, King County, and the State at new shoreline facilities (encourage these agencies to provide similar opportunities in existing facilities)

5. View and visual access from upland and waterfront lots

6. Prioritization of the operating requirements of water-dependent uses over preservation of views

7. Protection and enhancement of views by limiting view blockage caused by off-premises signs and other signs


SA P9 Waterways, which are public highways for watercraft providing access from land to water and from water to land platted by the Washington State Harbor Line Commission for the convenience of commerce and navigation, in Lake Union and Portage Bay, are for public navigation access and commerce, and in general, the City shall not request that the designation be removed from waterways. The City may request that waterways be vacated only when the City reclaims the area as street right-of-way or for public park purposes. The City may request that the dry
land portion of a waterway be redesignated for the additional purpose of providing
permanent public-access improvements.


SA P10		Shoreline street ends are a valuable resource for public use, access, and shoreline restoration. Design public or private use or development of street ends to enhance, rather than reduce, public access and to restore the ecological conditions of the shoreline.


Transportation in the Shoreline


GOALS

SA G8	Provide a transportation network that supports and enhances use of and access to the shorelines.

SA G9	Relocate or demolish transportation facilities that are functionally or aesthetically disruptive to the shoreline, such as the aerial portion of the Alaskan Way Viaduct on the Central Waterfront between King Street and Union Street.


POLICIES

SA P11	Encourage the transport of materials and cargo in the shoreline district via modes having the least environmental impact.



SA P12	Encourage large vessels (cruise ships and cargo-container ships) to connect to dockside electrical facilities or use other energy alternatives while in port in order to reduce engine idling and exhaust emissions.

SA PI3	Discourage, and reduce over time, vehicle parking on waterfront lots in the shoreline district.

SA PI4		Encourage the maintenance and future development of intermodal commuter ferry services to complement other public transportation systems, from both intracity locations and elsewhere in the region.

SA PI5	Provide public transportation convenient to the shoreline.

SA PIG

1. Locate streets, highways, freeways, and railroads away from the shoreline in order to maximize the area of waterfront lots. Discourage streets, highways, freeways, and railroads not needed for access to shoreline lots in the shoreline district. A replacement for the State Route 99 Viaduct with a tunnel and/or a surface roadway may be located in the shoreline district because it represents a critical link in the transportation network.

2. To facilitate expeditious construction in an environmentally and fiscally responsible manner, standards for major state and regional transportation projects should be considered that will allow flexibility in construction staging, utility relocation, and construction-related mitigation and uses, provided that the projects result in no net loss of ecological function.

3. Prohibit aerial transportation structures over thirty-five feet high, such as bridges and viaducts, on the Central Waterfront in the shoreline environments between King Street and Union Street, except for aerial
pedestrian walkways associated with Colman Dock, in order to facilitate the revitalization of Downtown's waterfront, provide opportunities for public access to the Central Waterfront shoreline, and preserve views of Elliott Bay and the land forms beyond.

SA PI7	The primary purpose of waterways in Lake Union and Portage Bay is to facilitate navigation and commerce by providing waterborne access to adjacent properties, access to the land for the loading and unloading of watercraft, and temporary moorage. Waterways are also important for providing public access from dry land to the water.

SA PI8	Public access shall be the preferred use for vacated rights-of-way. Public rights-of  way may be used or developed for uses other than public access, provided that such uses are determined by the City to be in the public interest, and that public access of substantial quality and at least comparable to that available in the right-of-way is provided.

Shoreline Protection and Restoration


GOALS

SA G10	Require that no net loss of ecological functions occurs as a result of uses, development, shoreline modifications, maintenance activities, or expansion of existing uses.

SA G11	Identify those areas of shorelines that are geologically or biologically unstable, fragile, or significant, and regulate development to prevent damage to property, the general public, aquatic and terrestrial species, and shoreline ecological functions.

SA G12	Preserve, protect, and restore areas necessary for the support of terrestrial and aquatic life or those identified as having geological or biological significance.

SA G13	Use scientific information to guide shoreline protection, enhancement, and restoration activities.

SA G14	Address and minimize the impacts of sea-level rise on the shoreline environment with strategies that also protect shoreline ecological functions, allow water-dependent uses, and provide public access.

SA GI5	Encourage the establishment of marine protected areas, where appropriate.

SA G16	Restore lower Duwamish watershed habitat and marine ecology while sustaining a healthy and diverse working waterfront in this urban industrial environment.

SA G17		Strengthen the vitality of a functioning ecosystem within Water Resource Inventory Areas (WRIA) 8 and 9 by integrating development projects into their surrounding environments, by supporting a diversity of habitats, and by strengthening connections between habitats throughout each watershed.


POLICIES

SA P19		Use mitigation sequencing to meet no net loss of ecological functions. Mitigation sequencing refers to taking steps in this order: avoid, rectify, minimize, and/or compensate for the loss to ecological functions.

SA P20	Protect the natural environment of the shoreline through development regulations that include a requirement to use best management practices to control impacts from construction and development activities.

SA P21	Regulate development on those areas of shorelines that are biologically significant or geologically fragile to prevent harm to property, organisms, or the general public.

SA P22	Develop methods to measure both the impacts of development in the shoreline district and the effects of mitigation so that no net loss of ecological function occurs through development projects.

SA P23	Monitor the benefits of mitigation techniques to determine which are best suited to meet the goal of no net loss of ecological function.

SA P24 Conserve existing shoreline vegetation and encourage new shoreline plantings with native plants to protect habitat and other ecological functions, reduce the need for shoreline stabilization structures, and improve visual and aesthetic qualities of the shoreline.

SA P5	Avoid development in areas identified as special wildlife or priority saltwater or freshwater habitat unless no feasible alternative locations exist except for a water-dependent use or water-related use that has a functional requirement for a location over water and is located in saltwater habitat that is priority habitat solely due to its use by anadromous fish for migration, if the development mitigates impacts to achieve no net loss of ecological function.

SA P26		Protect environmentally critical areas as set out in the policies for environmentally critical areas and modified to reflect the special circumstances of such areas in the shoreline district.

SA P27	Require that all commercial, industrial, or other high-intensity uses provide means for treating natural or artificial urban runoff to acceptable standards. Developments with industrial or commercial uses that use or process substances potentially harmful to public health and/or aquatic life shall provide means to prevent point and nonpoint discharge of those substances.

SA P28	Consider the Lower Duwamish Watershed Habitat Restoration Plan (Weiner, K. S., and Clark, J. A., 1996); the Port of Seattle Lower Duwamish River Habitat Restoration Plan, the Final Lower Duwamish River NRDA Restoration Plan and Programmatic Environmental Impact Statement, the WRIA 8 Chinook Salmon Conservation
Plan and implementation documents, and the WRIA 9 Salmon Habitat Plan and implementation documents when conducting planning, permitting, mitigation, and restoration activities within the Duwamish/Green River and Cedar River watersheds.

SA P29 Allow dredging in the minimum amount necessary for water-dependent uses, environmental mitigation or enhancement, cleanup of contaminated materials, and installation of utilities and bridges.

SA P30 Allow fill on submerged land that does not create dry land only where necessary and in a manner that minimizes short- and long-term environmental damage, for the operation of a water-dependent or water-related use, transportation projects of statewide significance, installation of a bridge or utility line, disposal of dredged material in accordance with the Dredged Material Management Program, beach
nourishment, or environmental mitigation or restoration and enhancement. Design projects to ensure no net loss of ecological function through mitigation sequencing.

SA P31	Permit landfill that creates dry land only where necessary for transportation projects of statewide significance, repair of pocket erosion for water-dependent and water-related uses, beach nourishment, or environmental mitigation or restoration and enhancement. Construct fill projects in a manner that minimizes short- and long  term environmental damage, and design projects to ensure no net loss of ecological function through mitigation sequencing.

SA P32		Work with other government agencies and shoreline users to reduce the input of pollutants, to restore contaminated areas, to control disposal of dredge spoils, and to determine the appropriate mitigation for project impacts.

SA P33	Use a restoration plan to identify areas that have potential for shoreline habitat restoration. Identify restoration opportunities that will best achieve ecological improvement, describe the appropriate restoration activities for the conditions in those areas, and provide incentives for achieving restoration of the shorelines.

SA P34  Support programs that inform the public about shoreline conservation practices, and identify methods by which public and private shoreline owners or community groups may encourage aquatic and terrestrial life, require such methods when appropriate, and provide incentives for such projects.

SA P35	Support the scientific study of the shoreline ecosystems that will provide information to help update baseline condition information; to monitor the impact of any action; and to guide protection, restoration, and enhancement activities to meet the no net loss requirements and implement the restoration plan.

SA P36		Where applicable, new or expanded development and maintenance shall include environmental cleanup and restoration of the shoreline to comply with any relevant state and federal law.


Shoreline Economic Development


GOAL

SA G18	Encourage economic activity and development by supporting the retention and expansion of existing water-dependent and water-related businesses on waterfront lots.


POLICIES

SA P37	Support the retention and expansion of existing conforming water-dependent and water-related businesses, and anticipate the creation of new water-dependent and water-related development in areas now dedicated to such use.

SA P38	Identify and designate appropriate land adjacent to deep water for industrial and commercial uses that require such condition.

SA P39	Provide regulatory and nonregulatory incentives for property owners to include public amenities and ecological enhancements on private property.

SA P40 Identify and designate appropriate land for water-dependent business and industrial uses as follows:

1. Cargo-handling facilities:

a. Reserve space in deep-water areas with adequate vessel-maneuvering areas to permit the Port of Seattle and other marine industries to remain competitive with other ports.

b. Work with the Port of Seattle to develop a long-range port plan in order to provide predictability for property owners and private industry along the Duwamish River and Elliott Bay.

2. Tug and barge facilities: Retain Seattle's role as the gateway to Alaska, and ensure ample area is designated for uses that serve Puget Sound and Pacific trade.

3. Shipbuilding, boatbuilding, and repairs: Maintain a critical mass of facilities in Seattle in order to meet the needs of the diverse fleets that visit or have a home port in Seattle, including fishing, transport, recreation, and military vessels.

4. Moorage: Meet the long-term and transient needs of ships and boats including fishing, transport, recreation, and military vessels. Support long-term moorage in sheltered areas close to services, and short-term moorage in more open areas. Support the efficient use of Fishermen's
Terminal, Shilshole Bay Marina, and other public moorage facilities. Protect commercial and recreational moorage from displacement by encouraging the full use of submerged lands for recreational moorage in areas less suited for commercial moorage and less sensitive to environmental degradation. Require large recreational marinas to provide some commercial transient moorage as part of their facilities.

5. Recreational boating: Maintain diverse opportunities for recreational boaters to access the water. Allow a variety of boating facilities, from launching ramps for small "car top" or "hand-carried" boats to major marinas. Encourage recreational moorage by providing both long-term and short-term moorage at marinas and short-term moorage at cultural and recreational sites.

6. Passenger terminals: Maintain and expand the opportunity for convenient travel by ship to local and distant ports for residents and visitors. Encourage passenger-only ferries on the Central Waterfront.

7. Fishing industry: Maintain a critical mass of support services, including boatbuilding and boat repair, moorage, fish processors, and supply houses to allow Seattle fishermen to continue to service and have a home port for their vessels in Seattle waters. Recognize the importance of the local fishing industry in supplying local markets and restaurants. Recognize the economic contribution of distant-water fisheries to Seattle's maritime and general economy.

SA P41	Allow multiuse developments including uses that are not water dependent or water related where the demand for water-dependent and water-related uses is less than the land available or if the use that is not water dependent is limited in size, provides a benefit to existing water-dependent and water-related uses in the area, or is necessary for the viability of the water-dependent uses. Such multiuse development shall provide shoreline ecological restoration, which is preferred, and/or additional public access to the shoreline to achieve other Shoreline Master Program goals.


Shoreline Recreation


GOALS

SA G19	Manage and optimize publicly owned shorelines that are suitable for public recreation.

SA G20	Increase shorelines dedicated to public recreation and open space.

SA G21	Identify, protect, and reserve for public use and enjoyment areas in the shoreline district that provide a variety of public-access activities and that connect to other public-access sites so that public access is available throughout the city.

SA G22	Allow increased opportunities for the public to enjoy water-dependent recreation, including boating, fishing, swimming, diving, and enjoyment of views.


POLICIES

SA P42	Designate for water-dependent recreation, areas where there are natural beaches, large amounts of submerged land or sheltered water, and minimal heavy ship traffic or land suitable for heavy industrial activity, while protecting ecological functions.

SA P43	Provide for recreational boating facilities, including moorage and service facilities, on publicly owned land, and encourage the provision of such facilities on private property in appropriate areas that minimize environmental impacts.

SA P44	Increase publicly owned shorelines, giving priority to those areas of the City that lack recreational facilities.

SA P4S	Explore alternatives to acquisition for providing public recreation at the shoreline and on the water.

SA P46	Identify submerged lands that could be used for underwater parks.

Shoreline Archaeological and Historic Resources

GOALS

SA G23  Encourage the restoration, preservation, and maintenance of areas of the shoreline having significant archaeological and historical importance.

SA G24 Encourage the restoration of archaeological and historic features of the shoreline where consistent with economic and environmental goals.


POLICIES

SA P47		Designate, protect, preserve, and support restoration of sites and areas of the shoreline district having historic or cultural significance, including through landmark designation where appropriate.

SA P48 Avoid impacts to areas identified as archaeologically and historically significant, unless no reasonable alternative locations exist and impacts to the resource are mitigated.


Shoreline Environments

Discussion

State law requires that the Shoreline Master Program address a wide range of physical conditions and development settings along the shoreline. The Shoreline Master Program spells out different measures for the environmental protection, allowed uses, and development standards for each area of the shoreline. Each distinct section of the shoreline is classified as a particular environment. The environment designations provide the framework for implementing shoreline policies and regulatory measures. The shoreline environments within Seattle's shoreline district are divided into two broad categories-conservancy and urban  and then subdivided further within these two categories.

The conservancy shoreline environments are less developed and provide for areas of navigation, recreation, and habitat protection. The urban shoreline environments are areas that are more developed and provide for single-family houses and water-dependent and water-related uses. The conservancy and urban shoreline environments are described in the following goals and policies.

Conservancy Shoreline Environments


GOAL
SA G25	The conservancy shoreline environments are intended to provide for navigation; public access; recreation; and protection, restoration, and enhancement of ecological functions in the shoreline district, while allowing some development if designed to protect ecological functions.


Conservancy Management (CM) Environment


GOAL
SA G26 The purpose of the Conservancy Management Environment is to preserve and enhance the shoreline environment while providing opportunities for shoreline recreation.



POLICIES

SA P49	Encourage restoration of ecological functions in areas where such function has been degraded.

SA P50 Accommodate water-oriented public infrastructure projects or such projects that require a waterfront location and that are compatible with the ecological functions of the area.


Conservancy Navigation (CN) Environment


GOAL
SA G27		The purpose of the Conservancy Navigation Environment is to preserve the shoreline environment while providing navigational use of the water.


POLICIES

SA PSI	Allow in-water and overwater structures that are primarily for navigational purposes.

SA P52	Enhance and restore ecological function, where feasible, in areas where such function has been previously degraded.

Shoreline Figure 1
Seattle Shorelines


Conservancy Preservation (CP) Environment


GOAL
SA G28 The purpose of the Conservancy Preservation Environment is to preserve, enhance, and restore the ecological functions in the shoreline district.


POLICIES

SA P53	Prohibit uses that substantially degrade the ecological functions or natural character of the shoreline.

SA P54  Prohibit commercial and industrial uses and non-water-oriented recreation.

SA P55	Prohibit parking that can be located outside the CP area.

SA P56	Limit access and utilities to those necessary to sustain permitted uses and activities.


Conservancy Recreation CCR) Environment


GOAL
SA G29 The purpose of the Conservancy Recreation Environment is to preserve and enhance the shoreline environment while providing opportunities for shoreline recreation.


POLICIES

SA P57	Prioritize public access, water-dependent recreation, and other water-oriented uses compatible with ecological protection.

SA P58	Locate public access and public recreation only where the impacts on ecological functions can be effectively mitigated.


Conservancy Waterway CCW) Environment


GOAL
SA G30 The purpose of the Conservancy Waterway Environment is to preserve and enhance the shoreline environment while providing access to the shoreline and water by watercraft.



POLICIES

SA P59	Provide navigational access to adjacent properties, and access to and from land for the loading and unloading of watercraft and temporary moorage.

SA P6o Allow in- and overwater structures only where needed for navigational purposes, temporary moorage, minor vessel repair, pedestrian bridges, and/or ecological restoration.

SA P61	Minimize impacts on navigation, public views, and ecological functions.


Urban Shoreline Environments


GOAL

SA G31	The urban shoreline environments are intended to provide for increased development of the shoreline for residential, commercial, and industrial uses while protecting ecological functions.



Urban Commercial (UC) Environment


GOAL

SA G32	The purpose of the Urban Commercial Environment is to provide for water-oriented uses of the shoreline and for uses that are not water oriented when shoreline restoration and enhancement or public access is provided.


POLICIES

SA PGZ	Allow uses that are not water oriented only when in combination with water-dependent uses or in limited situations where they do not conflict with or limit opportunities for water-dependent uses or on sites where there is no direct access to the shoreline.

SA P63	Require visual access to the water through view corridors or other means for commercial and larger multifamily residential projects.

SA P64 Provide for public access to the shoreline, and require shoreline environmental restoration and enhancement for uses that are not water dependent.

Urban General (UG) Environment


GOAL

SA G33	The purpose of the Urban General Environment is to provide for commercial and industrial uses in the shoreline district where water access is limited.


POLICIES

SA P65	Allow commercial and industrial uses that are not water dependent or water related.

SA P66  Require visual public access where feasible.



Urban Harborfront (UH) Environment


GOAL

SA G34  The purpose of the Urban Harborfront Environment is to provide for water  oriented uses (uses that are water-dependent, water-related, or water-enjoyment, or a combination of such uses) of the shoreline and for a mix of uses that are water oriented and not water oriented on lots where shoreline restoration and enhancement or public access is provided.


POLICIES

SA P67	Allow a mix of uses in recognition of this environment's roles in tourism and transportation, while ensuring a high degree of public access and recognizing the historic, environmental, and anthropogenic nature of this area.

SA P68 Allow uses that are not water oriented as part of mixed-use developments or in circumstances where they do not conflict with or limit opportunities for water  oriented uses.

SA P69 Allow uses that are not water oriented on sites where there is no direct access to the shoreline.

SA P70 Allow uses that reflect the diversity of development in the area and support adjacent retail and the tourism industry. On waterfront lots, provide public access and opportunities for large numbers of people to access and enjoy the water in the form of restaurants and water-dependent recreational activities. Allow a broader range of uses on upland lots to support the tourism industry and retail core.

SA P71	Maintain and enhance views of the water and the landforms beyond the water to augment the harborfront's pedestrian environment and status as an important

waterfront destination. Encourage connections to east-west corridors and waterfront trails.

SA P72	Encourage and provide for physical public access to the water, where appropriate and feasible.

SA P73	Development should support or enhance the existing historic character of the urban harborfront while balancing the need for ecological enhancement.


Urban Industrial (UI) Environment


GOAL

SA G35	The purpose of the Urban Industrial Environment is to provide for water-dependent and water-related industrial uses on larger lots.


POLICIES

SA P74	Allow uses that are not water dependent to locate on waterfront lots in limited circumstances and in a limited square footage on a site as part of development that includes water-dependent or water-related uses, where it is demonstrated that the allowed uses will benefit water-dependent uses and where the use will not preclude future use by water-dependent uses.

SA P75	Allow uses that are not water dependent or water related where there is no direct access to the shoreline.



Urban Maritime (UM) Environment


GOAL

SA G36 The purpose of the Urban Maritime Environment is to provide for water-dependent and water-related industrial and commercial uses on smaller lots.


POLICIES

SA P76	Design public access to minimize interference with water-dependent, water-related, and industrial uses, and encourage that public access be located on street ends, parks, and other public lands.

SA P77	Allow uses that are not water dependent to locate on waterfront lots in limited circumstances and in a limited square footage on a site as part of development that includes water-dependent or water-related uses, where it is demonstrated that the allowed uses will benefit water-dependent uses and where the use will not preclude future use by water-dependent uses.

SA P78	Allow uses that are not water dependent or water related on lots where there is no direct access to the shoreline.

Urban Residential CUR) Environment


GOAL

SA G37		The purpose of the Urban Residential Environment is to provide for residential use in the shoreline district when it can be developed in a manner that protects shoreline ecological functions.


POLICIES

SA P79	Provide for single-family residential use of the shoreline in areas that are not suited for industrial and commercial use, habitat protection, or public access.

SA P8o Provide development standards that allow residential development and protect ecological functions, such as shoreline armoring standards and structure setback regulations.

SA PSI	Multifamily development is not a preferred use in the shoreline district and should be limited to locations where allowed as of January 2011.

SA P82  Require public access as part of multifamily development of greater than four units.

SA P83	Provide for access, utilities, and public services to adequately serve existing and planned development.



Shorelines of Statewide Significance

Discussion

In addition to the goals and policies of each shoreline environment, the following policies apply to all shorelines of statewide significance under the jurisdiction of the Shoreline Master Program, which include: Puget Sound, the Duwamish River (shorelines from the south city limits north to South Massachusetts Street on the east side and Southwest Bronson Street on the west side, and including Harbor Island and the East and West Duwamish Waterways), Lake Washington, and Union Bay to the Montlake Bridge, as illustrated in Shoreline Figure 1.

POLICIES

SA P84	Protect the ecology of natural beaches and fish migration routes, including the natural processes associated with feeder bluffs.

SA PSS	Encourage and enhance shoreline recreational activities, particularly in developed parks.

SA P86	Provide for quality public access to the shoreline.

SA P87	Preserve views of Puget Sound and the landforms beyond, as well as views of Lake Washington and Union Bay.

SA PSS	Preserve and enhance the resources of natural areas and fish migration routes, feeding areas, and spawning areas.


Height in the Shoreline District


POLICIES

SA P89	The thirty-five-foot height limit provided in the Shoreline Management Act shall be the standard for maximum height in the Seattle shoreline district. Exceptions in the development standards of a shoreline environment may be made consistent with the Act and with underlying zoning and special districts where

1. a greater height will decrease the impact of the development on the ecological condition,

2. a greater height will not obstruct views from public trails and viewpoints,

3. a greater height will not obstruct shoreline views from a substantial number of residences on areas adjoining the "shorelines of the state" as defined
in RCW 90.58.030(l)(g) that are in Seattle and will serve a beneficial public interest, or

4. greater height is necessary for bridges, or equipment of water-dependent or water-related uses or manufacturing uses.

SA P90	Heights lower than thirty-five feet

1. shall be the standard for structures overwater, and

2. where a reduced height is warranted because of the underlying residential zone, or

3. where a reduced height is warranted because public views or the views of a substantial number of residences on areas adjoining the "shorelines of the state" as defined in RCW 90.58.030(l)(g) that are in Seattle could be blocked.

Shoreline Master Program Process


GOAL

SA G38  Continue shoreline planning by periodically updating the inventory, goals, policies, and regulations to respond to changing priorities and conditions in Seattle's shorelines.


POLICY

SA P91	Conduct periodic assessments of the performance of and the need for change in the Shoreline Master Program.










