Community Involvement
Introduction
The City of Seattle uses community involvement to create plans, design programs, and guide city investments and policy decisions. The early and ongoing involvement of community stakeholders is an essential part of an effective, inclusive, and accessible decision-making process. It enables the City to make decisions informed by the inputs and lived experiences of residents in order to best address their needs. It provides community members with the ability to voice concerns, prioritize issues, share knowledge, and to communicate how a City action might impact or benefit their lives and community. Effective community involvement includes sharing clear information with the public and accessible forums for residents throughout the city to come together, discuss issues of importance to their communities, and connect with City staff. It also means providing meaningful opportunities to give feedback and to see how their input has shaped decisions made by the City. As we do this work, we are committed to equitable community involvement in decision-making processes that affect community members.


Engaging all Seattle Residents Equitably
DISCUSSION
Effective community involvement is designed and carried out to reach all of Seattle's many neighborhoods, a full spectrum of all residents and cultural communities in the city, businesses large and small, and organizations that have a stake in the policies adopted to shape our future and the action taken by the City to make those policies a reality.
Many people, however, face barriers to participation in the engagement process. These barriers have prevented many communities-overwhelmingly, BIPOC and low-income communities - from accessing engagement opportunities and information that would allow them to understand, participate in, and shape the City's decision-making. Historically, the majority of the feedback received came from those with the time, resources, and familiarity with navigating the City's engagement process. Facing many barriers-lack of time due to work or family demands, language access, technological literacy, poorly explained City processes, and lack of trust between community and the City-other communities are rendered largely silent in comparison and are thus under- represented and disempowered. Equitable engagement seeks to break down these barriers.
GOAL

CI G1	City decisions shaping plans and policies, citywide and community investments, and other programs and initiatives include and reflect equitable and inclusive engagement with communities and stakeholders across the city.
POLICIES

CI 1.1	Use well-designed, responsive, and culturally relevant community involvement plans and strategies that provide opportunities for community members, organizations, businesses (including small locally owned businesses), and other key stakeholders to learn about and shape City plans and decisions.
CI 1.2	Prioritize community involvement that reflects the needs of under-represented people and communities, including: populations at risk for displacement, Black, Indigenous, and People of Color (BIPOC), youth, elders, low-income households, people with limited-English proficiency (LEP), immigrants and refugees, LGBTQ+, people who are unhoused, people with disabilities, and other groups who have been under-represented in City decision-making processes.
CI 1.3	Increase representation, input, and involvement by members of under-represented communities, community leaders, and stakeholders in public outreach and engagement across the full range of City projects.

CI 1.4	Design decision-making processes in ways that are reflective of and accessible to affected communities.
CI 1.5	Provide clear and timely information to community about how their input can or has shaped City policies and decisions.
CI 1.6	Provide a wide range of opportunities for obtaining information and involvement in decision-making processes.
CI 1.7	Seek opportunities to do engagement in community-based settings, culturally significant and accessible spaces, and locally organized meetings.
CI 1.8	Seek to reflect the diversity of the city in the membership of city-appointed boards and commissions.


Engagement Partnerships
DISCUSSION
Community involvement can be more effective and more equitable when the City partners in this work with organizations that are rooted in communities themselves. Engagement partnerships are a way that the City can support and empower communities to drive the engagement process from within. By tapping the ability of community leaders to effectively reach their own community members, the City will support an engagement process whose inputs will more accurately communicate the needs and priorities of its diverse communities. These partnerships also lay the groundwork for more durable and trusting relationships with historically underrepresented communities.
GOAL

CI G2	Community engagement reflects and benefits from the coordinated efforts of City, organizational, and community-based partners.
POLICIES

CI 2.1	Partner with community-based organizations, other public agencies, schools, institutions, labor and trade unions, and other organizations in designing and carrying out the community engagement process.
CI 2.2	Build relationships with community members and community-based organizations that are established through a long-term commitment to building mutual respect, trust, and community well-being.
CI 2.3	Establish partnerships with community-based organizations to engage and empower BIPOC and other underrepresented communities that historically have experienced barriers to participating in City decision making processes.

CI 2.4	Partner with impacted communities to identify and design strategies that advance a more equitable and inclusive future, reduce and repair past harms, and reduce current and future risk of displacement.
CI 2.5	Identify and partner with youth-based organizations to uplift the perspectives and inputs of this population, which will inherit the legacy of current City decision making processes.


Building Community Capacity
DISCUSSION
Equitable engagement can be more successful with investments in the capacity of communities to participate effectively in the engagement process. Capacity strengthens community members' ability to share input that is based on their collective expertise, knowledge, and lived experience as they relate to the benefits and impacts of City policies and actions. Prioritizing capacity building in historically underrepresented communities will help ensure that both the process and results of City decisions are more equitable.
GOAL

CI G3	Seattle has an equitable community engagement process that enfranchises all residents in City decision-making processes and builds the long-term capacity of communities to organize to improve their lives and neighborhoods.
POLICIES

CI 3.1	Actively support the ability of community members, particularly those of historically underrepresented communities, to develop the knowledge and skills to effectively participate in City decision-making processes.
CI 3.2	Identify opportunities to elevate community expertise, lived experience, and leadership to guide and inform engagement and planning processes.
CI 3.3	Prioritize available resources to plan for and implement equitable community involvement, including, where appropriate and feasible, compensation for time, experience, and expertise shared through the engagement process.
CI 3.4	Promote opportunities for community-based participatory research and data collection to inform and shape City plans, policies, and investments.


Indigenous Engagement
DISCUSSION
The City is committed to investing in and growing its engagement with both Tribal Nations and its Urban Indigenous population. This includes engaging and collaborating with Indigenous peoples

early and frequently when developing and implementing programs and policies. The City is also committed to working in collaboration with Indigenous people to increase Indigenous visibility and voice by prioritizing and supporting cultural practices, stewardship, and ways of knowing.
GOAL

CI G4	City of Seattle has established relationships, practices, and processes of engagement with Tribes and urban Native communities that reflect the ongoing importance of Indigenous communities to the City and its future in the region.
POLICIES

CI 4.1	Identify and incorporate Indigenous engagement methodologies and practices that will make engagement more accessible to the Indigenous community.
CI 4.2	Honor and uphold government to government relationships with federally recognized Tribes through early and frequent Tribal consultation.
CI 4.3	Ensure that Tribal sovereignty and treaty rights are recognized and respected throughout the planning process.
CI 4.4	Seek opportunities for City staff to learn directly, and with reciprocity, from Tribal and urban Native leaders about trust and treaty rights, Tribal sovereignty, Tribal governance, Native history, culture, protocols, and appropriate ways to engage with Tribes and Urban Indian Organizations.
CI 4.5	Partner with Native artists and community members to co-develop creative approaches for Indigenous representation and visibility.
CI 4.6	Support early and ongoing consultation with urban Native communities and with Tribal governments, working with these communities to learn more about the needs, strengths, and challenges of Indigenous communities with regards to City processes and plans.
CI 4.7	Utilize data, reports, and educational information generated by Indigenous communities to inform City plans, projects, and processes.
CI 4.8	Strengthen inter-departmental coordination and consistency in engagement with Tribes and urban Indigenous communities toward a more structural, systemic, citywide approach that better serves Tribal and urban Native partners.
CI 4.9	Support opportunities for Native leaders to convene with City representatives and with each other to share and celebrate their work with one another, troubleshoot solutions to common challenges, break down silos, and increase collaboration.


