Parks and Open Space
Introduction
Parks and open spaces help make Seattle a great place to live, play, and raise families. These places contribute not only to the city's environmental health but also to the physical and mental health of its residents. Access to open space can benefit individuals by giving them places to exercise their bodies and refresh their minds. Open spaces also provide valuable wildlife and vegetation habitat that might otherwise be scarce in the city.
Public space includes any outdoor, publicly accessible area dedicated primarily to human or environmental use (exclusive of transportation use). Seattle's has more than 1,000 public spaces owned and managed by several different agencies and private entities, comprising about 20 percent of the total city land area. Public spaces include gardens, plazas, trails, schoolyards, parks, natural areas, and more. From the magnificent views from the bluffs of Discovery Park to the tree-lined boulevard system and intimate pocket parks, these areas provide opportunities for residents and visitors to relax, play, exercise, or meet with friends and neighbors.

Developed parks are not the only sources of open space that people enjoy in the city. Open spaces and recreation opportunities are also located in public rights-of-way, such as along Cheasty and Ravenna Boulevards or in Bell Street Park. Off-road bike trails, including the Burke-Gilman Trail and Alki Beach Park, offer other types of active recreation. An extensive system of P-Patches and other community gardens throughout the city offer gardening spaces for residents to grow their own fruits, vegetables, and flowers. Seattle Center and the Central Waterfront are also City-owned and managed public spaces offering unique urban amenities that offers both open space and a wide variety of programs and cultural activities.
Many different public spaces in Seattle are owned and maintained by entities other than the City. These include fields and playgrounds at public and private schools, areas such as the federal Chittenden Locks, several waterfront access points provided by the Port of Seattle, and the open spaces on several college and university campuses. Numerous private developments have made plazas and other open areas available to the public, such as Waterfall Garden Park in Pioneer Square.
Puget Sound and the city's lakes provide another form of open space. These wide stretches of water are open to the sky and offer visual relief from the urban environment, as well as visual connections to other areas of the city and region.
Public spaces are also important places for supporting artistic and cultural performances, festivals, events, and public gatherings.
City-owned park and recreation lands are protected by a 1996 voter-initiated and approved legislation, Initiative 42. It sets out a process for considering the transfer or change in use of any lands held for park and recreation purposes, and requirements for replacing park and recreation lands lost.
In 2014 voters in Seattle approved the formation of the Seattle Park District. This district implements a new taxing authority and funding source for the maintenance and improvement of City parks, as well as for programs aimed at serving historically underserved residents and communities. Some of the ways the City obtains new parkland are by using state funds, acquiring surplus federal land, establishing requirements for new development projects, providing incentives for developers, and creatively using public rights-of-way.
The Capital Facilities Appendix includes a detailed inventory of current open spaces and an analysis of future needs.


Equitable Provision of Public Space
While Seattle has one of the best public space networks in the country overall, some neighborhoods are better served than others, with more public space being concentrated in affluent and majority white neighborhoods. In turn, communities of color often received less public space investments.

There are also disparities in vulnerability to climate impacts that disproportionately affect low- income communities and communities of color. Public spaces can reduce these impacts on residents.
The City of Seattle is continuously working to improve our public space system. To improve equity and fairness, the City works to focus these efforts on the neighborhoods that currently face the most environmental challenges while also having the least access to environmental goods, like public space.
In addition to improving access to public space for communities of color, it is also important to improve the responsiveness of those spaces to the needs, interests, and cultures of the people they serve.
Major public space investments can have negative impacts on neighborhood affordability. It is important to work to preserve community stability and affordability while making such investments.


Access to Public Space
DISCUSSION
The city has a robust citywide public space system. At the same time, the City continues to look for ways to improve this system. Seattle is already very developed, so there aren't many opportunities to find new land for parks and open spaces. Creating the system that we desire-one that will address existing inequities and serve our growing population-will require new strategies, including strategies to increase capacity and add new opportunities within existing parks.
This section addresses the design and distribution of our citywide public space system, including how new parks and open space are acquired and developed and existing public spaces improved.
GOAL

P G1	Public spaces are expanded and enhanced as the city grows, and current inequities are addressed, so that everyone has access to the full range of recreational, social, cultural, and health benefits that public spaces provide.
POLICIES

P 1.1	Create new and enhanced public spaces in areas that lack them, especially where population growth is anticipated in the Growth Strategy, including the greater downtown area.
P 1.2	Provide a variety of public spaces to serve the city's current and future population consistent with the priorities identified in the City's Parks and Open Space Plan.
P 1.3	Identify opportunities to develop new public spaces or enhance existing public spaces to accommodate a wide variety of uses and public benefits, including: community gathering and social connection; cultural expression and celebration;

civic action and democratic expression; respite and connection to nature; physical activity, health, and well-being; and food security and local economic vibrancy.
P 1.4	Enhance and activate public spaces that are currently underused due to lack of investment.
P 1.5	Equitably expand access to existing public spaces, including by providing safe, multi- modal connections to surrounding communities.
P 1.6	Plan for all ages and abilities access by transit, bicycle, and foot when siting and designing new park facilities or improving existing ones.
P 1.7	Design healthy public spaces considering the needs of varying age groups including young children and their caretakers, school-aged children, teenagers, and older adults.
P 1.8	Continue to develop a network of all ages and abilities trails as to connect to public spaces and shorelines.
P 1.9	Explore how existing rights-of-way can be repurposed to create more public space for temporary uses, such as community events, street fairs, farmers' markets, arts and cultural events and neighborhood celebrations.
P 1.10	Identify opportunities to convert rights-of-way to permanent public space uses, such as gardens, play areas, and urban plazas.
P 1.11	Consider temporarily or permanently restricting general purpose vehicle usage on rights-of-way within or directly adjacent to public space and shorelines to improve usability, non-motorized access, and the recreational value of these public spaces.
P 1.12	Provide areas to preserve or restore important natural or ecological features and allow people access to these spaces by building or expanding trail systems through greenbelts and other natural areas.
P 1.13	Create connections between natural areas and open spaces for both people and wildlife using habitat corridors, green streets, pollinator pathways, and other green connections.
P 1.14		Provide sustainable public access to shorelines by improving shoreline street ends, applying shoreline regulations, and acquiring waterfront land.
P 1.15	Encourage private development to incorporate on-site open space that is welcoming and accessible to all populations.
P 1.16	Consider the use of open space impact fees to support public space system expansion and enhancement that will serve expected population growth.

P 1.17	Maintain and expand cooperative agreements with Seattle Public Schools and other public or private agencies to provide or expand access to open spaces they control and increase the tree canopy and green space they provide.
P 1.18	Prioritize investments in recreation programs and facilities that reduce disparities in health outcomes and neighborhood environmental quality.
P 1.19	Mitigate the noise and air pollution impacts on public space from adjacent busy roadways, especially in neighborhoods with poor health outcomes, using strategies such as noise walls, vegetated buffers, and roadway design and management, repurposing, or removal.
P 1.20	Design open spaces that protect the natural environment and provide light, air, and visual relief within the built environment.
P 1.21	Design public spaces to provide multiple benefits, such as providing a variety of recreational uses and environmental functions, such as with stormwater capture.
P 1.22	Engage with community members to design and develop parks and recreation facilities based on the specific needs and cultures of the communities the park is intended to serve.
P 1.23	Prioritize cleaning up contaminated sites in historically underserved neighborhoods, particularly on sites dedicated or planned for community-serving or environmental uses.
P 1.24	Create opportunities to use existing public land and buildings for public space and recreation, such as reallocation of the right-of-way, integration with green and climate-resilient infrastructure, removal, lidding, or redesign of highways and streets to create public space or multimodal trails, addition of green or accessible roofs on public buildings, and redesign of single-purpose or fee-based public spaces, especially near high-capacity transit.
P 1.25	Incorporate weather protection for outdoor equipment such as playgrounds, weather-mitigating elements, and appropriate programming for all seasons and times of day.
P 1.26	Consider joint-use or mixed-use development opportunities, such as a community center with housing or office above, where appropriate.
P 1.27		Consider a range of alternative financing strategies, including, where feasible, value capture tools, to build, improve, or maintain public spaces.
P 1.28	Increase access to culturally relevant healthy foods, particularly in food deserts by increasing foraging and agricultural opportunities on public green space.
P 1.29	Incorporate Indigenous ecological knowledge and culture in open space design, plant selection, and interpretive elements.

Recreation, Activation, and Programming
DISCUSSION
Recreational opportunities, activation, and programming of our public spaces help to ensure that all residents can enjoy the benefits of healthy activities, social interaction, and experiences that promote overall well-being.
Recreational opportunities should address the diverse needs, abilities, and interests of individuals, offering opportunities for physical activity, leisure, and play.
Activation refers to the design and utilization of public spaces to create vibrant and engaging environments. Through thoughtful activation strategies, public spaces can become lively gathering spots that stimulate community interaction, cultural exchange, and economic vitality. This involves organizing events, festivals, performances, and markets that celebrate diversity and local talents, attracting people from different backgrounds and fostering a sense of belonging. By activating public spaces in an equitable manner, cities can combat social isolation, break down barriers, and create spaces that are truly welcoming for everyone.
Programming in public spaces refers to the planning and coordination of activities and services that cater to the diverse needs and interests of the community. It involves offering a range of programs, such as educational workshops, art installations, fitness classes, and community events that are accessible, inclusive, and representative of the community's demographics. By incorporating programming that addresses the specific needs and interests of marginalized groups, public spaces can become platforms for empowerment, learning, and cultural expression.
GOAL

P G2	People of all ages, abilities, and incomes have access to a rich variety of culturally relevant, affordable recreational and social activities and events.
POLICIES

P 2.1	Develop activities at parks and community centers based on the specific needs of each community they serve.
P 2.2	Promote the use of open spaces and park facilities for events that celebrate our history and the many cultures of our communities.
P 2.3	Provide welcoming, culturally informed, accessible, and affordable recreation and social programs, equipment, and facilities for people of all ages and abilities and all cultural and linguistic backgrounds, while prioritizing opportunities for young children and their caretakers, older adults, and people with marginalized identities.
P 2.4	Develop programs that foster awareness and appreciation of nature from the neighborhood scale to the regional scale and provide activities for residents to help protect or restore the environment.

P 2.5	Integrate opportunities for nature play and social interaction into public spaces and along trails or walkways.
P 2.6	Consider removing barriers for the sale of food and alcoholic and other beverages within public spaces to increase activation and usage.
P 2.7	Support free and affordable arts and cultural activities and performances in public spaces, particularly those led by BIPOC organizations and individuals. Support artists to design permanent and temporary improvements and installations in public space.
P 2.8	Encourage safe and welcoming evening experiences in nightlife areas and encourage a greater diversity of activities in the adjoining public spaces.


Operations and Maintenance
DISCUSSION
The upkeep and effective management of public spaces helps them to remain accessible, safe, and inclusive for all individuals in the community. Equitable maintenance practices prioritize the needs of BIPOC, low-income, and other underserved populations, ensuring that public spaces in their neighborhoods receive the same level of attention and care as those in more affluent areas. The maintenance of public spaces can contribute to creating healthier and more sustainable communities. This includes implementing sustainable landscaping practices, water conservation measures, and environmentally friendly maintenance techniques that minimize negative impacts on the surrounding ecosystem.
GOAL

P G3	Public space operations and maintenance practices contribute to healthy urban ecological systems, reduce unjust environmental burdens, and ensure access to high-quality public spaces for all.
POLICIES

P 3.1	Work to limit water and energy use and to maximize environmental sustainability in parks and open space construction and maintenance activities.
P 3.2	Protect habitat and wildlife areas through education, interpretation, and wildlife- management programs.
P 3.3	Preserve and reclaim park property for public use and benefit and ensure continued access to parkland for the growing population.
P 3.4	Leverage public space capital and program investments and agreements with private vendors to provide training, apprenticeships, youth employment, and living wage job opportunities for Black, Indigenous, People of Color, and people with other marginalized identities.

P 3.5	Improve environmental quality by reducing pollution and emissions in public space maintenance, irrigation, and land management practices.
P 3.6	Site maintenance and operation facilities that provide local environmental and economic benefits in communities with greater environmental burdens.
P 3.7	Adjust maintenance standards for public space and recreational facilities to reflect increasing and changing use by a growing and diversifying population.


Partnering with Communities
DISCUSSION
Partnering with communities in the design, activation, and stewardship of public spaces is key to creating inclusive and responsive environments. Resourcing community members with funding and capacity-building opportunities enables them to actively engage in these processes and have a meaningful impact. By removing current barriers such as bureaucratic hurdles and resource disparities, communities can fully participate in shaping their public spaces. Empowering community members with decision-making authority and providing them with the tools and support needed to lead these efforts ensures that public spaces genuinely address the needs, interests, and cultures of the community. This collaborative approach fosters a sense of ownership, pride, and collective responsibility, resulting in public spaces that are not only reflective of the community but also contribute to their overall well-being, social cohesion, and sense of belonging.
GOAL

P G4	Community members are empowered and resourced to activate, improve, and steer the design of public spaces in their neighborhoods.
POLICIES

P 4.1	Support community members and organizations to steer the design and development of parks and recreation facilities based on their experience of public spaces, preferred uses, perception of safety in public space, and the specific needs and cultures of the communities the park is intended to serve.
P 4.2	Establish partnerships with public and private organizations to supplement programming that supports residents' needs and interests.
P 4.3	Remove barriers and provide technical and financial support, where possible, for community-based organizations or non-profits seeking to acquire, activate, steward, or improve public spaces, particularly in underserved neighborhoods.
P 4.4	Provide green career pathways for people experiencing homelessness, Black, Indigenous, and People of Color youth, and people with limited economic opportunity by expanding job training, youth employment, conservation corps, apprenticeship, and professional development programs.

P 4.5	Partner with and support Indigenous communities and individuals to incorporate Indigenous cultures, histories, values, and land management and stewardship practices in public spaces. Explore opportunities to return public land to Indigenous ownership.
P 4.6	Seek opportunities to create or repurpose public spaces specifically designed for Indigenous communities' use and cultural expression. Identify opportunities to integrate Coast Salish languages in public spaces, including naming spaces.
P 4.7	Implement community-informed equitable development strategies to prevent displacement when making major investments in trails and public spaces in high displacement risk neighborhoods.


Climate Resilient Open Space
See also the Climate and Environment Element.

DISCUSSION
By incorporating climate-resilient elements into public space design, such as floodable open spaces and green stormwater infrastructure, cities can protect against climate-related threats and address the disproportionate impacts of climate change. These features provide opportunities to manage stormwater, reducing the risk of flooding, and protecting vulnerable neighborhoods. Additionally, nature-based resilience infrastructure, including bioswales, rain gardens, and green roofs, not only improve stormwater management but also enhance biodiversity and promote ecosystem services. Moreover, trees and green spaces play a critical role in mitigating extreme heat by providing shade, cooling effects, and reducing the urban heat island effect. By prioritizing climate-resilience in the public space system, cities can advance climate justice, safeguard communities, and contribute to a just transition towards a more sustainable and equitable future.
GOAL

P G5	Public spaces support a healthy environment and resilient shorelines and mitigate the impacts of climate change.
POLICIES

P 5.1	Protect, restore, and expand urban forests and tree canopy on City-owned land, including rights-of-way, prioritizing frontline communities.
P 5.2	Develop interdepartmental partnerships to integrate green infrastructure designed to capture, clean, or re-use flood and storm water into new and existing public spaces.
P 5.3	Enhance the use of public outdoor space and community centers to provide protection from heat and smoke events, particularly in vulnerable communities, through tree planting, water features, shade structures, and building design.






