Introduction
Seattle's Comprehensive Plan is a roadmap for where and how our city will grow and invest in our communities over the next twenty years and beyond. Seattle last engaged in a citywide process to update its Comprehensive Plan nearly a decade ago. This major update, the One Seattle Plan, advances a vision for the future that aligns with our City's core values to make Seattle more equitable, livable, sustainable, and resilient for today's residents and generations to come.
The One Seattle Plan (Plan) was created in dialogue with people throughout Seattle about the future they want to see for themselves, their families, their communities, and the city they call home. The Plan was developed through extensive public engagement with a focus on seeking diverse community input, and this dialogue will continue as we work to implement this Plan in the coming years.
The Comprehensive Plan addresses a wide range of topics, but a few themes comprise the heart of this One Seattle Plan. These are the four key moves that respond to the issues and concerns emphasized by community members and stakeholders across the city and that will guide our planning over the next 20 years. The Plan also addresses important regional and statewide priorities and laws intended to facilitate construction of affordable and family housing, improve mobility, and allow for future population growth and climate resilience. Taken together, numerous goals and policies in the Plan further each of the following:
Housing and Affordability: Expand housing opportunities across the city. This Plan is designed to meet Seattle's pressing housing needs now and into the future. In a rapidly growing region, a housing shortage is one factor that makes homes too expensive for people to afford and is a root cause of homelessness. The impacts are greatest for people with low incomes and Black, Indigenous, and People of Color (BIPOC) communities who may have less access to intergenerational wealth than white communities. Ultimately, many people across the city feel the strain of high housing costs in different ways. This Plan encourages more housing in more places in order to move toward a future where homes are plentiful, the cost burden of renting or owning a home goes down, and people achieve stability. This Plan also creates opportunities to employ our public resources, including the Housing Levy, to build the housing we need.
The shortage of quality, affordable family-sized homes is pushing too many young families out of our city or straining their resources to stay in Seattle. We must align our housing plans to meet this specific need and ensure that homes that meet the needs of families- particularly working and middle-income households-are built and maintained in every neighborhood. Housing near schools, day care, transit lines and other services can help stabilize neighborhoods, improve enrollment in our schools, and keep Seattle a city that protects and supports kids and families.

Equity and Opportunity: Promote a more equitable Seattle as we grow. Over generations, growth and change in Seattle have not provided equal benefits to all communities. Policy decisions, lack of investment, and discriminatory housing practices, including redlining and racially restrictive covenants, have led to the displacement of BIPOC communities and limited access to home ownership and generational wealth building for these residents. This Plan takes steps towards addressing these harms, and ushers in a new, more equitable strategy for how Seattle will grow in the future. New growth must welcome newcomers, help communities thrive in place, and provide opportunities for former residents who have been displaced to return.
Community and Neighborhoods: Focus growth and investment in complete, walkable communities. Our vision for One Seattle includes a network of complete, connected communities that welcome more neighbors of all ages, races, ethnicities, and incomes. This Plan supports economically vibrant neighborhoods across the city with focused growth near transit, including light rail and high-quality bus service, so residents can meet their everyday needs nearby without needing a car. This Plan takes steps to foster more walkable neighborhoods that are welcoming and accessible, with safe public spaces for neighbors to gather and build community.
Climate and Sustainability: Meet the challenges of climate change for a resilient future. Seattle residents are feeling the impact of the climate crisis with more extreme weather events every year, disproportionately impacting lower income and communities of color. This Plan introduces a Climate and Environment element that redoubles our effort to reduce our carbon footprint and build resiliency in frontline communities most vulnerable to climate impacts. The new element includes strategies to reduce carbon pollution from key sectors: transportation, development pattern, buildings, energy, and solid waste. It also promotes a wide range of measures to enhance the resilience of our communities and natural environment that are threatened by current and potential climate impacts.


Trends and Challenges
Each major update to a city's comprehensive plan is an opportunity to take stock of what has changed since the last update and what issues and challenges are paramount for the city and its residents now. Some of the most significant trends and events that transpired in the last decade that shape this Plan are summarized below. The One Seattle Plan strives to address and respond to these and other recent and ongoing drivers of change.

Continued Rapid Growth
In the years preceding this Plan, Seattle continued to be one of the fastest growing major cities in the country. From 2010 to 2020, the city experienced a huge increase in employment, adding more than 175,000 jobs - a gain of 38%. While housing was produced at a historic pace with the addition of 60,000 net new homes over the same time period, an increase of 19%, the scale of production

was not enough to keep pace with employment and population growth. Much of the new job growth was in high-wage fields, as Seattle's per capita income notched up to nearly $75,000, the second highest among U.S. large cities.

Effects of the Global Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic caused major immediate and long-term changes to cities around the world. In Seattle, BIPOC communities experienced disproportionate health, economic, and social impacts. These disparities underscore the racial and social inequities that persist in our city, region, and country. The pandemic also accelerated shifts in how we work, which changed daily activity and commuting patterns, and elevated the value of neighborhoods, public space, and local access to amenities.

Lack of Affordability
The cost of living in Seattle, in particular the cost of housing, continued to be a problem. Over the last 10 years, the average annual Zillow Home Value Index for a detached home more than doubled from $415K to $946K, far beyond what most Seattle-area households can afford. The median monthly cost of rent and basic utilities increased by 75% from $1,024 in 2011 to $1,787 in 2021. Lack of affordability is linked directly to an increase in unhoused populations, which reached an estimated 33,700 people in King County according to the state Department of Commerce's Snapshot of Homelessness for July 2022.

Displacement Pressure
In the years preceding this Plan, displacement pressure continued to be a major concern for many Seattle community members. A recent Puget Sound Regional Council (PSRC) survey found that 27% of Seattle households who moved within the region from 2014 to 2019 did so due to rising housing costs or other displacement-related reasons. While the population of color in Seattle as a whole has increased, many neighborhoods in South Seattle have seen substantial decreases in certain communities of color as housing in these areas becomes less affordable. Neighborhoods in and around the Central Area have continued to see very large decreases in the numbers of Black residents. Other neighborhoods with large shifts include Beacon Hill and Seward Park, where the Asian population has continued to decrease. Furthermore, the number of Hispanic and Latino residents counted in South Park decreased between 2010 and 2020 in significant contrast to this population's growth in the neighborhood between 1990 and 2010.

Climate Change
As the climate changes, Seattle residents are experiencing environmental, health, and economic effects. In recent years Seattle has seen numerous unprecedented or historically rare extreme weather events including but not limited to extreme heat events with temperatures over 105 degrees (2021), regular smoke events in late summer (2017, 2018, 2020, 2021, 2022, 2023), and tidal flooding of neighborhoods in the Duwamish River floodplain (2022). These changes are harmful for

everyone, but frontline communities bear a disproportionate burden of harm. Globally, the 10 warmest years in the historical record have all occurred since 2010.

Expansion of Regional Transit
Over the past several years, Sound Transit has taken major steps to expand light rail - the region's primary high-capacity transit system. Since the last Comprehensive Plan update light rail service was extended with service from Westlake to Northgate, and new service across Lake Washington with a station at Judkins Park will open in 2025. In 2016 voters approved the nearly $54 billion Sound Transit 3 measure, which will further expand light rail during the 20-year timeframe of the One Seattle Plan with a new line from Ballard to West Seattle and roughly a dozen new or expanded stations within the city.


Four Key Moves
The following summarizes specific ways that this Plan will help advance the four key moves.

Housing and Affordability: Expand Housing Opportunities Across the City
The One Seattle Plan is designed to improve the supply, variety, and affordability of housing across the city. Our approach addresses past exclusionary policies and practices and the need to expand housing and neighborhood access. It sets a vision for the future of Seattle where housing options are diverse, affordable, and meet the needs of current and future households of all sizes, incomes, and cultures. Increasing our ability to build more housing in more places will help to ease market pressures that are driving up costs and contributing to displacement of BIPOC and low-income households and provide more affordable housing options for the working families of today and tomorrow.
ENCOURAGE MIDDLE HOUSING IN NEIGHBORHOOD RESIDENTIAL ZONES
The Growth Strategy allows for a broad range of housing types throughout Seattle's Neighborhood Residential (formerly Single Family) zones. The planned density and variety of housing is designed to meet new state requirements for "middle housing" (HB 1110) and includes opportunities to add new housing types, like duplexes, triplexes, fourplexes, sixplexes, and cottage housing in Neighborhood Residential zones across the city. These changes will provide new opportunities for diverse households to find the housing they need with access to high-quality neighborhood amenities. New homeownership options will provide housing stability and wealth building opportunities. For example, see the Urban Neighborhood section in the Growth Strategy element and the policies under Housing goals 2 and 6.
CREATE NEW HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES IN EXISTING AND EXPANDED CENTERS, INCLUDING NEW NEIGHBORHOOD CENTERS
For nearly 30 years, Seattle's Growth Strategy has concentrated growth in Urban Centers and Villages. The updated strategy creates new and expanded opportunities for housing and growth

near our major transit investments and established centers and villages. In addition, new Neighborhood Centers will allow additional moderate-density housing around commercial nodes, bus rapid transit stops, and neighborhood amenities. These additions to the City's current strategy for growth add to the supply of housing with wider opportunities for people to live within a short walk, bike, or transit ride to meet their daily needs. For example, see the Urban Centers and Neighborhood Centers sections in the Growth Strategy element.
EXPAND INVESTMENTS IN AFFORDABLE HOUSING
Even with the expansion of housing supply, market housing development is not expected to meet the needs of all segments of our community. The Housing element supports continued and increased investments in affordable housing. Under this Plan, resources from Seattle's Housing Levy, funds generated from development, Federal and State resources, and new incentives and revenue sources would expand the city's base of income-restricted affordable housing. For example, see policies under Housing Goal 3.

Equity and Opportunity: Promote a More Equitable Seattle as We Grow
Every resident should have the opportunity to thrive and to be a part of Seattle's future and its growing economy, but the benefits and burdens of our city's growth have not been distributed equitably. Many people, based on their race, ethnicity, gender, ability, income, or sexual orientation, have been historically excluded from the same housing and job opportunities, security, and freedoms that other Seattle residents have. This Plan begins to address the harmful effects of racially restrictive zoning by expanding the types of housing allowed in neighborhoods across Seattle. It also prioritizes programs and investments to support low-income and BIPOC communities that have experienced historical underinvestment to thrive. In these ways, this Plan works toward repairing historical injustices and building a more inclusive city.
REDUCE HOUSING AND NEIGHBORHOOD EXCLUSION
Policies in the Growth Strategy, Land Use, and Housing elements aim to lessen the patterns whereby BIPOC families and lower-income households have been excluded for generations from Seattle's neighborhoods and from homeownership opportunities. The Plan calls for more types of housing in many areas of the city and includes strategies to produce homes that are accessible, affordable, and designed to meet the needs of Seattle's diverse households. In doing so, we aim to redress the legacy of redlining and racially restrictive covenants that shape Seattle to this day. See the Housing Appendix for a detailed summary of racially disparate impacts and harms to BIPOC communities from racially restrictive policies and practices. For example, key policies in the Housing element include H 1.4, H 4.4, and H 4.5.
REDUCE RISK OF DISPLACEMENT
The Plan embraces a vision of growth without displacement of households, businesses, and cultural communities that are currently at risk of being forced to leave Seattle. The Plan highlights anti- displacement strategies across many elements and builds on many anti-displacement programs the City has in place. The Growth Strategy is designed to reduce market pressure that has contributed to displacement of lower income households and is designed to boost the supply and variety of housing across the city to increase affordability. Both the Plan and the actions the City will take to

achieve this vision are informed by data and ongoing input from affected communities. For example, see the Housing Security and Stable Communities section of the Housing element and key policies in other elements, including ED 1.10, AC 1.11, and CI 2.4.
SUPPORT WEALTH BUILDING
The Plan promotes a range of strategies to help BIPOC community members develop generational wealth. The Growth Strategy and Housing elements create new opportunities for homeownership. Key policies in these elements include H 4.7, H 5.2, H 5.9, and GS 7.2. The Economic Development and Arts and Culture elements enhance support for local small businesses, cultural institutions, asset ownership, and job training. For example, key policies in these elements include ED 1.5, ED 1.8, ED 4.1, ED 5.1, AC 3.1, and AC 3.7. The Plan also includes policies supporting the ability of community members to benefit from employment and other opportunities created with City investments. See CF 3.8, U 2.8, U 2.10, and P 3.4.
INVEST EQUITABLY TO MEET COMMUNITY NEEDS
Policies in the Transportation Element, Parks & Open Space Element, Arts and Culture, and Capital Facilities elements call for centering racial equity when directing investments into new facilities, infrastructure, and programs. The Plan prioritizes the allocation of resources for safer streets, new parks, arts facilities, community centers, and resilience hubs, among others, into communities that have been underinvested in and underserved for decades. For example, key policies include T 1.7, CF 3.2, P 4.3, and AC 3.6.

Community and Neighborhoods: Focus Growth and Investment in Complete, Walkable Communities
The One Seattle Plan aims to create more complete communities where Seattleites can gather with one another, meet their daily needs, and access what they love about their neighborhoods, all within an easy walk or bike, thus reducing reliance on automobiles. This Plan features new and expanded locations for growth, and focuses growth where residents can access transit, including light rail and high-quality bus service, close to home. It supports economically vibrant neighborhoods, strong business districts, and new opportunities for convenient amenities like neighborhood corner stores. Several elements include goals and policies to build more complete neighborhoods and a more connected city.
CREATE COMPLETE COMMUNITIES
The Growth Strategy in this Plan will enable the development of more complete and connected neighborhoods where residents can walk, bike, and roll to meet their everyday needs. This will be achieved by building on the investments in our current Urban Villages and Centers and adding new and expanded areas for growth, creating housing opportunities around existing neighborhood business districts with shops, services, and gathering places, and allowing a wider mix of non- residential uses in all our neighborhoods. New Neighborhood Centers are expected to feature more services and become gathering places. For example, key policies include GS 1.3, 1.4, 5.1, and 6.3.

ENSURE SAFE STREETS FOR ALL
This Plan was developed in coordination with the new Seattle Transportation Plan. In both plans, there is a strong focus on improving safety and reducing the degree to which streets are used for motor vehicles only. The Transportation element leads with physical safety, calling for protection of our most vulnerable road users. See the Promoting Safe Travel for All section of this element. The One Seattle Plan also promotes flexible use of our limited right of way and expanded safe and affordable transportation choices along with more options to use our right-of-way for people- centered activities and spaces that enliven streets and support communities. For example, key policies include T 2.17, T 2.18, and T 2.19.
ENHANCE AND EXPAND OPEN SPACES
The Parks and Open Space element focuses on addressing inequities in access to high-quality public spaces. Since Seattle is largely built out, this will include adding new opportunities and programming at existing parks and thinking creatively about new ways to provide public spaces in partnership with other agencies and community stakeholders. For example, key policies are included in the Access to Open Space section of the Parks and Open Space element.
CENTER ARTS AND CULTURE IN OUR NEIGHBORHOODS
The Arts and Culture element emphasizes the importance of cultural spaces and a network of activities that support the vibrancy of the city as a whole and, in particular, among BIPOC communities and young people. Goals and policies support a wide range of cultural spaces, both in the public realm and at a wide range of venues in community, that will help define the social character and identity of neighborhoods. The Plan calls for investments in public art that highlight the cultures of our neighborhoods and diverse communities. For example, see the goal and policies in the Cultural Spaces, Place-making, and Place-keeping section of the Arts and Culture element.

Climate and Sustainability: Meet the Challenges of Climate Change for a Resilient Future
The One Seattle Plan introduces a new Climate and Environment element that redoubles our commitment to reducing our collective impact on the global environment through carbon pollution that contributes to climate change. The element also focuses our efforts to make Seattle resilient in the face of these threats, especially for our most vulnerable populations and frontline communities. Our principles of stewardship and community resilience are shaped by and strengthened by the values and practices of the Coast Salish peoples, informed by ongoing engagement with Tribes in the region and our urban Indigenous community members.
ACHIEVE CARBON NEUTRALITY BY 2050
The City has committed to making Seattle carbon neutral by the year 2050 in order to reduce the impacts of climate change. This Plan guides broad-based actions to further a just transition away from reliance on fossil fuels. Government, businesses, and residents will need to work together to fulfill the long-term goals set forth in Seattle's Climate Action Plan. For example, key policies in the Climate and Environment element include CE 3.1 and CE 5.5. Other Plan elements, such as Transportation, Capital Facilities, and Utilities reinforce our climate mitigation with more specific policy direction to reduce our emissions.

REDUCE AUTOMOBILE DEPENDENCE
Goals and policies in numerous elements including Growth Strategy and Transportation promote development and investments that will make walking, biking, and public transit viable options for more people, thus reducing reliance on automobiles-a major source of carbon pollution in this region. For example, see the goals and policies in the Building a Green Transportation System section and the Expanding Transportation Options section of the Transportation element.
BUILD CLIMATE RESILIENCE
The impacts of climate change fall disproportionately on BIPOC communities, immigrants, refugees, people with limited English language proficiency, people with disabilities, and low-income residents. Climate impacts include heat, smoke, sea level rise, flooding, and impacts from other weather extremes. With the need to adapt to the present and future impacts of climate change, a new climate resilience sub-element includes policies that will shape how we invest equitably in communities across the city to become more complete, healthy, and resilient over time. For example, key policies include CE 7.3, CE 8.2, CE 9.3, and CE 10.3.
CONTRIBUTE TO A SUSTAINABLE REGION
By taking on a more significant share of the region's growth, Seattle helps protect rural farms and forests from development. It is also a way for our City to contribute to reducing carbon pollution on a regional scale by welcoming more affordable opportunities for people to live closer to regional centers of employment, education, and culture. The Growth Strategy element of this Plan adopts new approaches to accommodate more of the people coming to our region over the next 20 years.


State and Regional Policy Framework

Washington's Growth Management Act (GMA)
Enacted in 1990, Washington's Growth Management Act (GMA) requires counties and cities to create and regularly update comprehensive plans that prepare us for projected growth in population, housing, and jobs.
The GMA's goals include protecting farms and forests from sprawl and directing growth to already urbanized areas, especially cities. Each county, in collaboration with its cities, has established an urban-growth boundary, and each city must demonstrate that it is prepared for the urban growth that is expected over the next 20 years. The GMA requires comprehensive plans to address a range of topics and in recent years the State legislature added significant new requirements related to how local governments plan for housing and climate change. The GMA also requires that each city's plan be consistent with other plans in the region, as described below.

VISION 2050 / Seattle in the Region
With the most people and jobs of any city in Washington State, Seattle is the center of the fast- growing central Puget Sound region. Made up of King, Snohomish, Pierce, and Kitsap Counties, this

growing and dynamic metropolitan region expects to reach a population of 5.8 million and include a total of 3.4 million jobs by the year 2050.
The Puget Sound Regional Council (PSRC) is the regional growth management, transportation, and economic development planning organization. PSRC's VISION 2050 Plan envisions the region's growth occurring in centers and alongside our transit investments. VISION 2050 allocates especially large shares of growth to five "metropolitan cities"-Seattle, Bellevue, Everett, Tacoma, and Bremerton. The One Seattle Plan reflects Seattle's commitment to accommodate its share of growth as the metropolitan city at the heart of the region. Multicounty Planning Policies (MPPs) in VISION 2050 also provide guidance for local plans. PSRC reviews and certifies comprehensive plans for consistency with the MPPs.
The PSRC formally designates centers of regional importance within cities. The One Seattle Plan identifies 7 Regional Centers and 2 Manufacturing and Industrial Centers in Seattle (see figures 2, 3, and 7 in the Growth Strategy element). Subarea Plans for each of these centers will be included as part of the Plan as they are updated over time.

Countywide Planning Policies
In King County, the Growth Management Planning Council is made up of elected officials representing the county and its cities. These jurisdictions worked together to develop the Countywide Planning Policies (CPPs), which provide guidance for local comprehensive plans. The CPPs contain housing and job growth targets for each jurisdiction along with estimates of future affordable housing needs.
The CPPs include a process for designation of Countywide Centers, which, like Regional Centers, are locations where the region intends to focus growth and investment of the next 20 years. The CPPs provide a similar range of policy guidance for the content of local comprehensive plans as do the MPPs in VISION 2050, but with more detail to address the needs and goals of cities in King County.


Developing the One Seattle Plan
We developed the One Seattle Plan through a three-year process of research, analysis, and engagement with communities across the city. We analyzed data to better understand how the city had changed since the last time we updated the Comprehensive Plan and to explore the most pressing challenges facing the city, including, as described above, persistent racial inequities, climate change, and housing affordability.
We used the City's Racial Equity Toolkit (RET) to inform our process in creating the draft Plan. The RET was created by the City's Office of Civil Rights as a framework for understanding the potential impacts of new government actions to ensure that this these actions advance racial equity and do not have unintended consequences for BIPOC community members. The RET and Race and Social Justice Initiative ordinance guide the City's community engagement toward centering the voices of BIPOC and other historically under-represented communities.

The City's approach to equitable community engagement, which occurred online, in person, and through community organization partnerships, guided the preparation of this Plan and is reflected in the goals, policies, and narrative of the Plan. Feedback from communities across Seattle has been a critical input in its drafting.
Heightened engagement with Indigenous stakeholders, including Tribes, organizations serving and representing the urban Indigenous community, and community members, informed and shaped the major themes of this Plan which foster a sustainable and equitable future, as well as specific policies across multiple elements that address key issues. Informed by this work, Indigenous peoples' perspectives, values, and ideas are incorporated in various parts of the Plan.


Plan Implementation and Framework for Accountability

Implementing the Plan
The City will implement the One Seattle Plan through regulations, such as zoning and development standards, and through investments detailed in the functional plans developed by City departments. The principal purpose of this Comprehensive Plan is to provide policies that guide the development of the city in the context of coordinated regional planning and the City's core values. Community members and officials from all levels of government can look to these policies when planning for growth.
The Plan is made a reality through coordination by the City with and actions by the private sector, non-profit and community-based organizations (CBOs), and other government agencies that also help shape Seattle's future in significant ways. For example, the private sector builds most new housing, King County provides bus service, Sound Transit builds and provides light rail, Seattle Public Schools provides public education, the Port of Seattle operates shipping terminals, and CBOs provide services like childcare and job training. The City partners with these agencies to ensure we collaboratively work toward common goals. Implementation of this Plan therefore relies on the City maintaining relationships with many organizations throughout the region.
Although the City itself will use the Plan to direct the development of regulations that govern land use and development, it will not use the Plan to review applications for specific development projects, except when an applicable development regulation expressly requires reference to this Comprehensive Plan.

Components and Structure of the Comprehensive Plan
Each element of this Plan generally presents goals followed by policies related to those goals and may also include a discussion about the goals and policies. Some chapters also have appendices that contain important data and analysis that inform and provide context for our goals and policies.

Goals represent the results that the City hopes to realize over time, generally within the twenty-year life of the Plan, except where interim time periods are stated. Whether expressed in terms of numbers or only as directions for future change, goals are aspirations, not guarantees or mandates.
Policies should be read as if preceded by the words "It is the City's general policy to...". A policy helps to guide the creation of or changes to specific rules or strategies (such as development regulations, budgets, or program plans). City officials will generally make decisions on specific City actions by following ordinances, resolutions, budgets, or program plans that themselves reflect relevant Plan policies, rather than by referring directly to this Plan.
Implementation of most policies involves a range of actions over time, so one cannot simply ask whether a specific action or project would fulfill a particular Plan policy. For example, a policy that states that the City will give priority to a particular need indicates that the City will treat the need as important, not that it will take precedence in every City decision. Some policies use the words shall, should, ensure, encourage, and so forth. In general, such words describe the emphasis that the policy places on the action but do not necessarily establish a specific legal duty to perform a particular act, to undertake a program or project, or to achieve a specific result.

Monitoring and Accountability for Plan Implementation
A monitoring and accountability framework for the One Seattle Plan should include the following:

Regular reporting by the City on the actions taken to implement the Plan, including actions by departments individually and in coordination.
Regular data collection and analysis of indicators that tell us whether we are achieving the
outcomes envisioned by the Plan, especially racial equity outcomes.
Approaches to making information from our monitoring process accessible and useful for the public.
Opportunities for community stakeholders to engage in a meaningful and impactful way to shape Plan implementation over time and to hold the City accountable when our actions or outcomes fall short of its goals.
For example, one way the City will demonstrate accountability is by working with King County and the Affordable Housing Committee of the Growth Management Planning Council to monitor and report on our progress toward housing goals and policies consistent with new GMA requirements to produce an "implementation status report" by 2029. The results of this and other similar accountability measures will shape future actions to implement this Plan to achieve our desired future for Seattle.


