Economic  Development
Introduction
The City anticipates adding 159,000 net new jobs over the next twenty years. The Growth Strategy identifies the geographic areas best suited for job growth. Some businesses and jobs are best suited to mixed-use, walkable neighborhoods and business districts within our Regional Centers, Urban Center, and Neighborhoods Centers. Others require unique features, services, and targeted land uses that fit best in our Manufacturing and Industrial Centers (MICs). Guided by the policies in this Plan, Seattle will manage our local economy to sustain existing businesses while anticipating the needs of emerging businesses and industries.
Seattle is an attractive place to live, giving it a competitive economic advantage. Seattle's beautiful physical setting, thriving cultural scene, walkable neighborhoods, diverse restaurants, unique shopping, access to nature, and historic locations generate direct economic benefits to residents. These attributes also contribute to the high-quality of life that draws businesses, people, and tourists to the city. Seattle also benefits from the way leaders from public and private sectors work together to encourage innovation and to support business formation, retention, and expansion.

Throughout its history, however, economic expansion has not benefited Seattle's residents equitably. Historically marginalized communities have not had the same access to opportunities in growing industries that many Seattleites have benefited from.
The purpose of the Economic Development element of this Plan is to provide direction about how to maintain and grow Seattle's vibrant, diverse, and increasingly global economy to benefit individuals equitably across income levels, as well as business, industry, and the city's racially and culturally diverse communities. As Seattle grows, the City will strive to reduce income inequities and to identify and address policies that contribute to or create inequity.


Neighborhood Business Districts
DISCUSSION
Seattle enjoys an attractive, flourishing Downtown core that contains about 30 percent of all jobs within the city. Outside of Downtown, and throughout Seattle, are many long-standing, distinctive, walkable central places within neighborhoods. This is where many small businesses thrive, communities come together, and many local jobs are created. About 12 percent of Seattle's jobs are located in these areas. Neighborhood business districts are often a central anchor for BIPOC and immigrant communities providing opportunities for goods and services, cultural activities, and community gathering spaces.
GOAL

ED G1	Seattle consists of vibrant and diverse business districts and commercial areas that serve local communities in neighborhoods across the city.
POLICIES

ED 1.1	Invest in and promote stability, growth, and accessibility in the downtown core, as the economic and cultural center of the city and the region.
ED 1.2	Make investments for a safe, walkable, and accessible downtown core to attract businesses, residents, workers, and visitors.
ED 1.3	Build on downtown's cultural, historic, nightlife, and other assets to enhance living, working, shopping, recreation, tourism, and entertainment.
ED 1.4	Develop proactive and collaborative approaches toward achieving mutual compatibility of activities, including nightlife and entertainment and both businesses and residents.
ED 1.5	Invest in and promote neighborhood business districts as the economic and cultural centers of their communities and as unique places within the city and region.
ED 1.6	Strengthen local organizations that support businesses, conduct marketing and events, maintain a clean, safe, accessible, and attractive environment, and advocate for community needs.

ED 1.7	Support business districts serving historically underserved communities, including Native American communities, that have benefited from fewer economic opportunities.
ED 1.8	Enrich the vibrancy of neighborhood business districts through the integration of design, public art, public space, historic preservation, small locally owned businesses, and cultural spaces and programming.
ED 1.9	Support and prevent displacement of locally owned small businesses in neighborhood and commercial districts that exemplify and promote their community's identity, cultural richness, and character.
ED 1.10	Promote the development of affordable commercial spaces that meet the economic and cultural needs of BIPOC and other historically underserved communities, with a focus on serving the needs of businesses that are at risk of displacement.
ED 1.11	Support formation of Business Improvement Areas (BIA) and other business partnerships and alliances, to help provide clean and safe services, marketing and promotion, business and economic development planning, community appearance and pedestrian environment, urban design, advocacy, and organizational development/administration in commercial districts and key industries.


Growing Business and Industry
DISCUSSION
Seattle's best prospects for future economic growth are in its key "industry clusters"-concentrated networks of interdependent firms in a defined geographic area that share common markets, technologies, and a need for skilled workers. Examples of Seattle's industry clusters include manufacturing, maritime, biotech and life sciences, global health and health care, clean technology, information technology, tourism, and film and music.
These clusters help the associated businesses, which benefit from the rapid exchange of information, leading to innovative and efficient operations. The clusters are also an asset to the overall economy. Generally, businesses in industry clusters pay higher than average wages, bring new capital into the economy, are environmentally minded, and add variety to the economic base. By identifying key sectors of the economy in which Seattle has a competitive advantage, the City is better able to nurture industry clusters that contribute to a vibrant, balanced, diversified, and equitable economy that benefits individuals across all income levels. At the same time, we must work to reverse historically inequitable results from changing economic structure of the city that lead to uneven access to employment opportunities, increases in housing costs, and displacement of traditionally marginalized communities.

GOAL

ED G2	Seattle's innovative industry clusters in growing and essential high-wage industries continue to grow and develop, enhancing our competitive advantage as a city and region.
POLICIES

ED 2.1	Seek investments in workforce development and infrastructure to support maritime and manufacturing clusters.
ED 2.2	Support regional partnerships targeting maritime and manufacturing, to sustain and grow middle- and high-income jobs locally and support the regional and state economy.
ED 2.3	Promote, support, and improve linkages between industry clusters and research institutions, hospitals, educational institutions, and other technology-based businesses.
ED 2.4	Catalyze collaboration among businesses within and across industry clusters in the areas of marketing, research, capital and talent acquisition, job training, and career pathway development.
ED 2.5	Improve the ability of industry clusters to transfer technology.

ED 2.6	Work with strategic industry clusters to diversify key occupations, ensuring that the employed workforce is representative of Seattle's racial and socioeconomic groups.
ED 2.7	Promote and lead coordination of economic development and community development among City departments, as well as with all levels of government, the business community, and nonprofits, to strengthen industry clusters.
ED 2.8	Identify and support innovative, small locally owned businesses that have the potential to form new industry clusters.
ED 2.9	Promote employer retention through robust engagement with existing businesses to understand their needs and help them thrive in Seattle.


Business and Industry Retention and Growth
DISCUSSION
A city's business climate is determined by how well it attracts and sustains businesses. The external factors that shape this climate include quality of the workforce, taxes, regulations, incentives, and other government policies and investments, as well as overall quality of life in the city. Seattle is renowned for its mild climate, extraordinary access to recreation and natural resources, and diverse cultural offerings. Seattle's collaborative culture is another economic advantage. However, some aspects of Seattle's business climate pose challenges for business, such as complex development

regulations, earthquake risk, underfunded transportation and education systems, and past under- investment in many of the city's cultural communities and neighborhoods.
GOAL

ED G3	Seattle's business climate encourages new investment and business retention to achieve high quality job creation, economic resilience, and opportunities to ensure cultural identity, diversity, and inclusion.
POLICIES

ED 3.1	Promote the expansion of interstate commerce and international trade within Seattle and throughout the region.
ED 3.2	Support a stable and more competitive business climate through policies and planning that are implemented with transparent, predictable, and efficient regulations and approval processes.
ED 3.3	Foster partnerships with the state, counties, other cities, schools, community colleges, port districts, businesses, and organizations engaged in diversifying and expanding the economic base for people who live, work, and own businesses in Seattle.
ED 3.4	Improve coordination of information and services between City, county, regional, state, and federal agencies to develop and implement economic-development policies and programs.
ED 3.5	Prepare for post-disaster economic recovery by planning for long-term systemic needs and short-term mitigation strategies.
ED 3.6	Monitor and advocate for fiscal and other policies through data driven analysis that consider benefits and costs to business growth and retention, particularly those driving wealth creation within marginalized communities.
ED 3.7	Plan for and invest in transportation for movement of freight and people, infrastructure, and utilities to support strategic industries.
ED 3.8	Use Seattle's competitive advantages to attract and expand business, a highly skilled workforce, and good paying jobs to advance community and environmental sustainability.
ED 3.9	Implement zoning and other tools to encourage business growth and development that uses and promotes sustainable technologies.
ED 3.10	Identify opportunities to leverage Major public facilities and capital investments to drive for economic development and business retention.
ED 3.11	Assist businesses in identifying locations that suit their needs by tracking appropriate and available sites for business attraction or expansion.

Investing in Talent and Developing our Workforce
DISCUSSION
The success of industry clusters depends on a skilled and competitive workforce. However, employers often face challenges finding qualified job applicants for some positions in Seattle. This includes a variety of industries that have been unable to find enough local college graduates to fill jobs in certain engineering, computer, and life science fields, as well as traditional industries looking to replace an aging highly skilled workforce. As a result, many employers look to attract talent from elsewhere. Better education and training of local workers can connect displaced workers, disadvantaged youth, and recent immigrants to highly skilled job opportunities. Workforce development is one of the ways that the City can provide equitable access to career opportunities to BIPOC and immigrant communities.
GOAL

ED G4	Seattle has a highly trained and well-educated local workforce that effectively secures stable, meaningful, and productive employment, earns a living-wage, meets the needs of business, and increases opportunities for social mobility.
POLICIES

ED 4.1	Promote racial and social inclusion in the workforce by creating and growing workforce development programs specifically focused on diversifying talent pipelines for living wage jobs.
ED 4.2	Support and encourage businesses to pay a living wage, provide necessary employee benefits, and train and hire local residents so that the existing and future workforce can share in the city's prosperity.
ED 4.3	Explore opportunities to coordinate community development activities with workforce development in communities with high unemployment or barriers to employment.
ED 4.4	Expand internships, apprenticeships, and other "earn and learn" models for early career workers in high demand occupations supporting key industries.
ED 4.5	Create and grow re-training programs to help dislocated workers, including older workers, transition to new high-quality jobs in high-demand occupations.
ED 4.6	In collaboration with community-based organizations, expand programs designed to fully engage marginalized labor market participants in the labor force and on a path to economic self-sufficiency.
ED 4.7	Reduce barriers to education, training, and employment by developing program linkages, including digital access, to worker and student financial assistance, wrap- around supports, and childcare.

ED 4.8	Expand investments in youth of color and their parents and guardians to raise awareness and provide additional access to regional education and training pathways that lead to high demand careers and good quality jobs.
ED 4.9	Expand investments to promote stable employment and retain people working in arts, culture, technology, and other parts of the creative economy.
ED 4.10	Promote the development and expansion of high demand career pathways in occupations that result in good quality jobs in Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts, and Mathematics (STEAM) fields and related key industries.


Women, Minority-owned, and Small Business Supports and Entrepreneurship
DISCUSSION
Achieving a thriving and equitable community means we need to support entrepreneurial activity, particularly for women and minority-owned small businesses. As technological advances continue to lower the cost of starting new businesses, the number of new entrepreneurs will rise. In addition to attracting new types of businesses, we must redouble our efforts to retain the small, culturally diverse businesses that support equally diverse communities.
Our city is home to major national companies such as Trident Seafoods, Filson, Cascade Designs, Starbucks, Amazon, and Nordstrom, to name a few. However, most Seattle businesses are much smaller and have fewer than ten employees. Sectors with an especially high proportion of small businesses include construction, wholesale trade, manufacturing, retail and related services, and, increasingly, start-ups in technology and other creative industries. In addition, small food growers, processors, and distributors are a quickly expanding presence within the local economy.
GOAL

ED G5	Seattle's economy promotes and supports entrepreneurship and the growth and long-term viability of women and minority-owned small businesses.
POLICIES

ED 5.1	Strengthen small business start-ups by connecting women- and minority-based enterprises (WMBE) and other small businesses to capital.
ED 5.2	Support the expansion of higher education programs that promote commercialization of research innovations and incubate and accelerate the growth of new start-ups.
ED 5.3	Support and grow arts and culture activities to attract creative economy workers, living wage employers, and tourists to Seattle, as well as to enrich our overall culture of innovation.

ED 5.4	Develop strategies to lower the cost of business infrastructure for small businesses, including building relationships, finding resources, and providing shared infrastructure.
ED 5.5	Establish incentives for building owners to offer affordable spaces for start-ups and small businesses and partner with community-based organizations to own and operate their own affordable commercial real estate.
ED 5.6	Reduce barriers to business start-up and entrepreneurship, especially barriers that confront BIPOC, immigrant, and refugee communities, including by providing access to and support.


Asset Ownership
DISCUSSION
Asset ownership is an effective strategy to provide economic opportunity, create generational wealth, and provide jobs. This strategy is particularly important for women and minority owned businesses and it promotes economic stability through a flourishing small business sector.
GOAL

ED G.6	Seattle's economy fosters growth in business and asset ownership among small businesses, particularly BIPOC businesses.
POLICIES

ED 6.1	Support owner-occupied commercial real estate financing strategies, with a focus on BIPOC business owners, enabling businesses that are leasing commercial spaces to get the capital needed to buy them.
ED 6.2	Support community-based programs to enable BIPOC and low-income residents to acquire residential and commercial real estate through mechanisms such as community land trusts or community investment trusts.
ED 6.3	Support individual financial empowerment programs, including financial literacy training, bank access, and access to savings products like college savings accounts.


Build and Invest in the Green Economy
DISCUSSION
Building a green economy provides opportunities for new industries, wealth building careers, and complements current industrial clusters seeking to advance climate friendly modernization.

GOAL

ED G7	Seattle's economy includes vital green industry sectors to provide employment opportunities while promoting an environmentally sustainable future.
POLICIES

ED 7.1	Establish partnerships to build workforce capacity to advance completion of city- wide decarbonization and climate adaptation efforts, including through electrification, construction, conservation, and other new green technology programs.
ED 7.2	Promote and support access within BIPOC communities to wealth building, careers, asset ownership, and youth opportunity in strategic industries which are transitioning to a green economy.
ED 7.3	Support business partnerships and models which are centered on climate mitigation, climate adaptation, and/or a shift toward sustainable operational models within established industries, including incubator and accelerator funding of new sustainable businesses.
ED 7.4	Invest in resources and staff to increase and sustain STEAM education in K-12 systems with a focus on closing gender and race gaps in STEAM career fields.
ED 7.5	Use Seattle's sustainability policies and investments as a business recruitment tool.


