Growth Strategy
Introduction
Seattle is expected to grow significantly over the next 20 years and beyond. Forecasts of future growth and the region's growth plans indicate that the city will reach one million people by the middle of this century. Growth represents both an opportunity and a challenge. Accommodating new people and jobs can add vibrancy to our city and address climate change by allowing more people to live a low carbon lifestyle. However, if we don't plan for and accommodate a growing population, housing costs will continue to rise, pushing many people out of Seattle, worsening our homelessness crisis, and making many neighborhoods accessible only to high-income households.
In 1994, Seattle adopted its first Comprehensive Plan under the state Growth Management Act (GMA) with a growth strategy that concentrated nearly all growth in designated areas called Urban Centers and Urban Villages. Minimal growth was planned for single-family-zoned areas, which account for most land across the city. For 30 years, this "Urban Village strategy" has been effective in creating dense, walkable, mixed-use neighborhoods served by high-capacity transit in selected areas of the city. It has helped to shape major public and private investments, especially new and

expanded transit service. The strategy also has helped the city accommodate an important share of the region's housing and employment as part of the region's collaborative approach to planning for growth. Between 2010 and 2020, 83% of new homes were built in Urban Centers or Villages.
Even with successes, however, the strategy has also fallen short of meeting the needs of all Seattle residents for affordable and diverse housing choices, access to neighborhoods of opportunity, and community stability in the face of rising displacement pressures.
Many neighborhoods outside Urban Centers and Villages have few housing options beyond detached homes. As documented in detail in the Housing element and Housing Appendix, zoning that exclusively allows low-density detached housing is rooted in a history of racial and class exclusion marked by policies and real estate practices such as redlining and racial covenants. With the prices of these homes rising dramatically, especially in the last 10 years, these neighborhoods are increasingly out of reach for most people, perpetuating patterns of racial and economic exclusion and contributing to market pressures that cause displacement and gentrification.
Meanwhile, many Seattle residents seek housing options and neighborhood choices that our current growth strategy does not provide. Housing types such as duplexes, triplexes, fourplexes, small, stacked flats, cottage housing, courtyard apartments, and other low-scale residential types, all examples of what is frequently referred to as "middle housing," are not allowed in most areas currently. Middle housing can provide comparatively affordable family-sized housing, options for homeownership, and opportunities to reside in neighborhoods with key amenities, such as large parks and schools. The updated growth strategy includes expanded middle housing options in all neighborhoods. These changes are consistent with new state requirements which will expand housing choices in cities across the region and state.
This Plan also embraces a vision for "complete communities" where a rich mix of housing options are available within a short walk or bike trip to the goods, services, and amenities that residents need every day. Making this vision a reality in more neighborhoods will address the needs and desires expressed by community members across the city while also supporting the City's climate goals.
Urban Centers and Villages will continue to play an important role in a proposed new growth strategy for the next 20 years. At the same time, the One Seattle Plan adds new opportunities and locations for housing and job growth to create more complete, connected, and inclusive communities. Key goals for this growth strategy are to:
Accommodate new housing and jobs over the next 20 years and beyond.
Increase the supply, diversity, and affordability of housing to reduce upward pressure on prices and expand choices for diverse households.
Redress harms from neighborhood exclusion and housing discrimination, meet the housing needs of BIPOC households, and support wealth building opportunities.
Prevent the displacement of residents due to direct impacts and market forces.
Create and support communities where more people can access transit, shops, and services by walking, biking, and rolling.

Encourage a diverse mix of businesses and jobs in neighborhoods across the city and help existing businesses remain in place.
Advancing this vision are goals, policies, and implementation actions outlined in multiple elements. This Growth Strategy element describes where and how the City should accommodate expected growth in housing and jobs to achieve a pattern of development and investment that is more equitable, sustainable, and resilient than in the past. This element includes a description of the types of uses and buildings that are appropriate in different parts of Seattle. Other elements of this Plan describe tools the City will use to achieve the growth strategy as well as other investments and strategies necessary to meet our overall goals. For example, the Land Use element describes how zoning and development regulations will control the location and size of new buildings in ways that help carry out the growth strategy. The Housing element includes policies that will guide the types and characteristics of housing the City will aim for and the tools the City will use to make it possible for people of all backgrounds and households at all income levels to find housing that meets their needs. The Transportation element includes a policy framework for investments in multiple modes of travel that serve all areas of the city where growth will occur.


Planning for Growth
DISCUSSION
This section includes the goals and policies that apply to the growth strategy as a whole and inform the more detailed approach discussed in later sections.
The goals and policies in this section respond to the needs of the City as well as the need to plan for and accommodate population, housing, and jobs as set forth in requirements in the state Growth Management Act (GMA). Our growth strategy implements the Regional Growth Strategy in VISION 2050 adopted by the Puget Sound Regional Council as a long-range growth management plan for the four-county central Puget Sound region. The strategy also meets the City's obligation to accommodate a substantial share of the growth in King County as prescribed in the targets for housing and employment growth adopted by the Growth Management Planning Council. Estimated growth targets for the 2024-2044 period are 80,000 housing units and 159,000 jobs.
GOAL

GS G1	Seattle becomes a more equitable, vibrant, connected, and livable city with housing for a diverse and growing population; space for working, learning, and finding joy; and complete communities where people of all ages and abilities can walk, bike, and roll to meet their everyday needs.
POLICIES

GS 1.1	Plan for expected growth over the next 20 years while also providing additional housing capacity to enable the City to respond to existing unmet needs and potential demand from future employment growth.

GS 1.2	Encourage and plan for a variety of housing types in all neighborhoods to provide opportunities for a diverse population to live throughout the city and to allow people to stay in their neighborhoods as their needs change.
GS 1.3	Accommodate and plan for non-residential uses in neighborhoods across the city, including opportunities for major employers in areas with access to high-capacity transit and opportunities for local-serving businesses and services throughout Seattle.
GS 1.4	Focus higher-density housing and commercial space in areas near transit, parks, shops, services, walking and biking infrastructure, and other amenities.
GS 1.5	Limit rezones that would result in negative impacts to environmentally critical areas. GS 1.6	Avoid incompatible uses adjacent to general aviation airports.
GS 1.7	Focus higher-density office and employment uses in areas with access to regional transit.
GS 1.8	Focus industrial growth in designated Manufacturing and Industrial Centers while also allowing space in other areas throughout Seattle for light industrial businesses that support other businesses and residents.
GS 1.9	Coordinate planning for transportation, utilities, parks and recreation, libraries, and other public services to meet the anticipated growth and increased density throughout Seattle.
GS 1.10	Focus public investments to meet current and future needs, including addressing current inequities and to serve growing communities, particularly in designated centers.


Growth Strategy Overview
DISCUSSION
All areas in the city have a role in accommodating future housing and employment growth. This section outlines the roles that different areas of Seattle should play and the type of residential, commercial, and industrial buildings that are appropriate in each. Specifically, this section describes different "place types" and maps where they might be designated on the Future Land Use Map (FLUM).
The Future Land Use Map is a requirement of the Growth Management Act and is intended to show the desired scale and use of buildings for different parts of Seattle. This map provides guidance that is used in developing and updating more detailed zoning maps and development standards which regulate the size, use, and design for buildings. Figures 1 and 2 below show the FLUM and briefly describe the place types that comprise the Seattle Growth Strategy.

As the City's needs and priorities shift, the FLUM may be changed or formally amended. Some zoning changes, such as adjusting boundaries or locations of specific zones within the same general land use area or center, can be made without a formal amendment or change to the FLUM.
GOAL

GS G2	Seattle's development pattern, as shaped by the Future Land Use Map, results in a range of vibrant places that all play a role in accommodating housing and jobs.
POLICIES

GS 2.1	Use the Future Land Use Map to guide land use regulation.

GS 2.2	Require Future Land Use Map amendments only when needed to achieve a significant change to the intended function of a large area.

Description of Place Types that appear on the FLUM, Figure 1

PLACE TYPES	DESCRIPTION
Regional Center	Places with an important regional role due to the presence of substantial housing, office, retail, and/or entertainment uses and access to regional transit. Designated as Regional Growth Centers by the Puget Sound Regional Council.
Urban Center	Places with an important citywide role due to a wide range of housing, jobs, shops, and services and access to regional or local transit. Designated as Countywide Centers by the King County Growth Management Planning Council.
Neighborhood Center	Places with an important local role due to a variety of housing
located around a commercial core and/or access to frequent transit that provides an opportunity for people to access everyday needs within a short walk or bike ride from their homes.
Urban Neighborhood	Places outside centers that are appropriate for primarily
residential development with limited non-residential uses.

Manufacturing and Industrial Center	Areas of concentrated industrial activity with limited retail,
office, and residential uses, that primarily serve industrial businesses and workers. Designated as regional Manufacturing and Industrial Centers by the Puget Sound Regional Council.
OTHER AREAS	DESCRIPTION
Major Institutions	Hospitals, colleges, and universities of regional importance with limited housing and other uses
Industrial	Areas of industrial zoning outside Manufacturing and Industrial Centers
Parks & Open Space	City-owned parks and natural areas

Cemeteries	Cemeteries





Future Land Use Map, Figure 2



NOTE: Precise boundaries for Neighborhood Centers will be determined based on further analysis and community feedback and shown on the FLUM in the final Plan document released in 2024. The FLUM is not a zoning map and provides general guidance for future zoning.

Regional Centers
Regional Centers (previously referred to as Urban Centers in the Seattle 2035 Comprehensive Plan) are the densest Seattle neighborhoods. They are places of regional importance due to the presence of substantial housing, office, retail, and/or cultural and entertainment uses along with access to regional transit. Regional Centers include the neighborhoods of Downtown, South Lake Union, First Hill/Capitol Hill, Uptown, the University District, Northgate, and Ballard. These places contain some of the region's largest centers for business, commerce, and tourism and are hubs in the regional transportation network, especially high-capacity transit. To support this role and allow our region to grow, Regional Centers should accommodate a substantial share of the city's growth.
Regional Centers are designated as Metropolitan Regional Growth Centers by the Puget Sound Regional Council and the King County Growth Management Planning Council. As such, they meet regional criteria for size, mix of uses, transportation, and other characteristics. Subarea Plans for each Regional Center are developed and updated over time and adopted as part of the City's Comprehensive Plan.

Regional Center Map, Figure 3 (right)

POLICIES

GS 3.1	Designate as Regional Centers places of regional importance due to the presence of substantial housing, office, retail, and/or entertainment uses at higher densities and with access to regional transit.
GS 3.2	Recognize and plan for the unique role and character of different neighborhoods within large regional centers, particularly Downtown.
GS 3.3	Allow a wide range of higher-density housing types in Regional Centers. High-rise tower construction may be appropriate in Regional Centers.
GS 3.4	Allow a wide range of non- residential uses in Regional Centers including office, retail, and entertainment uses. Regional Centers should contain most of Seattle's office development.
GS 3.5	Seek to ensure that
Regional Centers meet Puget Sound Regional Council and Countywide Planning Policy requirements for Regional Growth Centers.
GS 3.6	Adopt subarea plans for each Regional Center that are consistent with Puget Sound Regional Council requirements and responsive to the unique challenges, opportunities, and community needs within each center.
GS 3.7	Plan to accommodate growth over twenty years in each Regional Center that includes at least the numbers of new housing units and new jobs shown in Figure 4.

Estimated Regional Center Growth 2024-2044, Figure 4


Regional Centers
New Housing Units
New Jobs
Downtown
13,500
60,000
First Hill/Capitol Hill
9,000
3,000
University Community
4,000
3,500
Northgate
2,000
2,500
South Lake Union
4,500
25,500
Uptown
3,500
2,500
Ballard
5,000
4,000
Urban Centers
Urban Centers (previously referred to as Urban Villages in the Seattle 2035 Comprehensive Plan) are walkable mixed-use areas that play an important role serving surrounding neighborhoods or even the entire city. Urban Centers include a wide range of housing, jobs, shops and services, and access to regional or local transit. These areas are destinations for residents in different districts of Seattle due to the high concentration of shops, restaurants, and businesses. Urban Centers are generally served with high-quality transit and biking and walking infrastructure. Over time, these areas have added a significant share of the city's new housing supply, primarily mid-rise multifamily housing, and are expected to continue in this role into the future.
Urban Centers are designated as Countywide Centers by the King County Growth Management Planning Council. As such, they meet criteria in the Countywide Planning Policies for size, mix of uses, transportation, and other characteristics. An appendix to this Plan includes profiles for each Urban Center that describe major characteristics, key data, and the history of planning in each area.

Urban Center Map, Figure 5 (right)

POLICIES

GS 4.1	Designate as Urban Centers those
areas that play an important citywide role due to wide range of housing, jobs, shops and services,
and access to regional or local transit. Areas with light rail stations outside Regional Centers should generally be designated as Urban Centers unless major topographic constraints or industrial zoning would limit growth in these areas.
GS 4.2	Seek to ensure that Urban Centers meet King County's criteria for Countywide Centers.

GS 4.3	Allow a wide range of housing types in Urban Centers. Urban Centers should generally allow buildings of 3 to 8 stories. Buildings greater than 8 stories may be appropriate in Urban Centers near light rail stations.
GS 4.4	Allow a wide range of non-residential uses including office, retail, and entertainment uses in Urban Centers. Major office developments are appropriate in Urban Centers but should be encouraged primarily near light rail stations.
GS 4.5	Allow various sizes of Urban Centers based on local conditions, but generally include those areas within a 10-minute walk (half-mile) of a current or future light rail station or 8-minute walk (2,000 feet) of the central intersection if no light rail exists.



List of Urban Centers, Figure 6

NE 130th Street
Fremont
Othello
23rd & Union-Jackson
Green Lake
Rainier Beach
Admiral
Greenwood
Roosevelt
Aurora-Licton Springs
Lake City
South Park
Bitter Lake
Madison-Miller
Upper Queen Anne
Columbia City
Morgan Junction
Wallingford
Crown Hill
North Beacon Hill
West Seattle Junction
Eastlake
North Rainier
Westwood-Highland Park
Neighborhood Centers
Neighborhood Centers are places with a diversity of housing options located around a locally focused commercial core and/or access to frequent transit. Neighborhood Centers in many cases represent the core of a neighborhood providing shops, services, grocery stores, restaurants, and other businesses that residents need to access on a regular basis. These areas provide an opportunity for people to access everyday needs within a short walk or bike ride from their homes. Allowing more housing in these areas can increase opportunities to live in complete connected neighborhoods, strengthen local businesses districts, and help people reduce reliance on cars.

Neighborhood Center Map, Figure 7 (right)

POLICIES

GS 5.1	Designate as Neighborhood Centers areas with a locally focused commercial core and/or access to frequent transit where diverse housing options could allow more people to live within walking distance of shops, services, transit, and amenities.
GS 5.2	Allow a diversity of housing, institutional, service, retail, and entertainment uses in Neighborhood Centers. Focus non-
residential uses primarily in the core of the center. Generally, avoid allowing major office developments in these areas.
GS 5.3	Zoning in Neighborhood Centers should generally allow buildings of 3 to 6 stories, especially 5- and 6-story residential buildings to encourage the development of apartments and condominiums.
GS 5.4	Determine the boundaries of Neighborhood Centers based on local conditions, but generally include areas within a 3-minute walk (800 feet) of the central intersection or bus rapid transit stop.

Urban Neighborhoods
Urban Neighborhoods are places outside centers that are appropriate for primarily residential development. While lacking the larger business districts located in centers, Urban Neighborhoods still provide opportunities for mixed-use and commercial development along major streets along with at-home businesses, corner stores, and small institutions located throughout to support small business and institutions and let people walk, bike, and roll to everyday needs.
Over the next 20 years and beyond, Urban Neighborhoods represent an opportunity to add more diverse housing options, including for homeownership, in all neighborhoods. By providing new options to add middle housing, such as duplexes, triplexes, fourplexes, and cottage housing, across the city, Urban Neighborhoods will contribute to making Seattle a more affordable and racially inclusive city.

Urban Neighborhood Map, Figure 8

POLICIES

GS 6.1	Designate as Urban Neighborhood
those areas outside centers that are appropriate for primarily residential development with limited non- residential uses.
GS 6.2	Allow a mix of lower-scale housing
types such as detached homes, duplexes, triplexes, fourplexes, sixplexes, and cottage housing
throughout Urban Neighborhoods. Allow moderate-scale housing of 4 to 6 stories in areas currently zoned for such housing and along arterials where zoned densities may be increased to provide more housing options near frequent transit.
GS 6.3	Allow a range of commercial and mixed-use development on major streets and smaller-scale non-residential uses such as small institutions, corner stores, and at- home businesses throughout Urban Neighborhood areas.

Manufacturing and Industrial Centers
Manufacturing and Industrial Centers (MICs) are areas of concentrated industrial activity with limited retail, office, and residential uses that primarily serve industrial business and workers. Seattle has two MICs: Greater Duwamish MIC and Ballard-Interbay-Northend MIC. Both MICS are places of regional importance due to the presence of industrial businesses in a range of sizes and major transportation facilities such as the container port, marinas, and rail infrastructure.
MICs are regionally designated by the Puget Sound Regional Council and the Growth Management Planning Council. This means they meet regional criteria for size, mix of uses, transportation, and other characteristics. Subarea plans for each MIC are developed and updated over time and adopted as part of the City's Comprehensive Plan.

Manufacturing and Industrial Center Map, Figure 9 (right)
POLICIES

GS 7.1	Designate areas as Manufacturing
and Industrial Centers areas that meet criteria for designation as MICs adopted by the Puget Sound Regional Council and the Growth Management Planning Council and have the following characteristics and:
Relatively flat terrain allows for efficient industrial processes.
Reasonable access to the regional highway, rail, air, and/or waterway systems for transportation of goods.
Presence of significant manufacturing, warehousing, and distribution uses. Transitions between industrial and non-industrial areas that allow for a range of industrial activities at a scale compatible with non-industrial areas.
Sufficient zoning capacity to accommodate a minimum of ten thousand jobs.

GS 7.2	Establish boundaries for Manufacturing and Industrial Centers that generally include continuous areas of primarily industrial use and considers natural barriers like highways and waterways and transitions to neighboring uses.
GS 7.3	Prioritize land that is proximate to irreplaceable industrial infrastructure such as deep-water ports, rail, and regional highways for continued industrial use.
GS 7.4	Allow a wide variety of manufacturing and industrial uses in Manufacturing and Industrial Centers to support the retention and expansion of existing industrial businesses and provide opportunities for the creation of new businesses consistent with the character of industrial areas.
GS 7.5	Maintain manufacturing and industrial activity as the primary use in Manufacturing and Industrial Centers.
GS 7.6	Allow limited commercial uses that are compatible with the primarily industrial nature of Manufacturing and Industrial Centers.
GS 7.7	Plan to accommodate growth over twenty years in each MIC that attains at least the numbers of new jobs shown in Figure 10.

Estimated Manufacturing and Industrial Center Growth 2024-2044, Figure 10

MIC Center	Estimated New Jobs

Greater Duwamish Center	12,500 jobs

Ballard-Interbay-Northend	6,000 jobs

Major Institutions
The Major Institution place type includes the campuses of regionally important hospitals, colleges, and universities that may include limited housing and other uses. The geography of this place type is limited to those areas where institutions have worked with the City to develop Major Institution Master Plans. These plans allow for the creation of area-specific regulations that balance the importance of accommodating major institutions with managing impacts on adjacent areas.
POLICIES

GS 8.1	Designate as Major Institutions the campuses of regionally important hospitals, colleges, and universities that develop Major Institution Master Plans.
GS 8.2	Allow Major Institution Master Plans to guide development in these areas, rather than the underlying zoning.
GS 8.3	Allow housing and limited commercial uses within the Major Institution place type, whether or not they are directly related to the Major Institution, to address the needs of workers and students as well as other people who want to work, learn, or live in the area.
GS 8.4	Prioritize growth within existing Major Institutions boundaries over the expansion of established boundaries.


Parks and Open Space
The Parks and Open Space place type includes City-owned developed parks and natural areas. This place type is different than other place types as it is primarily intended to describe existing conditions rather than desired future land use change outcomes.
POLICIES

GS 9.1	Designate as Parks and Open Space those City-owned areas currently being used as parks or open space.
GS 9.2	Maintain park and open space uses as the primary use in the Parks and Open Space place type.
GS 9.3	Allow housing in the Parks and Open Space place type only where it is located within a development containing a park and open space use such as a community center or pool.
GS 9.4	Allow limited commercial and institutional uses in the Parks and Open Space place type within existing buildings or where it could activate park and open space uses.

Area Planning
DISCUSSION
The Comprehensive Plan provides broad citywide direction for the future of Seattle as the city grows over the next several decades. To fulfill the vision of this Plan and implement the growth strategy, the City also undertakes more focused planning in our Regional Centers, Urban Centers, transit station areas, and other neighborhoods. Area plans are intended to provide more detailed and actionable direction on the full range of policy areas reflected in this Plan, such as land use, housing, transportation, public spaces, climate resilience, and more. A plan for a specific area within the city reflects its unique characteristics and needs while recognizing the role that each place will play in the overall growth strategy.
The City advances area planning through focused initiatives such as the subarea planning for Regional Centers, including Downtown, Uptown, South Lake Union, First Hill/Capitol Hill, University District, Ballard, and Northgate, which are home to a significant share of Seattle's residents
and workers and locations for a significant share of Seattle's future growth. Another key focus for area planning in the city focuses on station area planning for equitable transit-oriented development, particularly around new Sound Transit stations.
Area planning reflects a commitment to equitable growth and development across the city. By centering a diversity of community voices in the area planning process, we can accommodate the needs of both existing stakeholders and a growing, diverse population.
GOAL

GS G10	Regional Centers, Manufacturing and Industrial Centers, station areas, and other key priority areas in the city will have updated area plans guiding City and community actions to create and sustain equitable and resilient communities.
POLICIES

GS 10.1	Develop and adopt subarea plans for Regional Centers and Manufacturing and Industrial Centers.
GS 10.2	Develop station area plans for high-capacity transit station areas and surrounding communities.
GS 10.3	Identify additional neighborhoods for area planning in locations experiencing or anticipated to experience significant change, such as from major public or private investment, climate and environmental factors, and gentrification and displacement.
GS 10.4		Prioritize City resources for area planning for Regional and Urban Centers, areas with higher risk of displacement, areas with low access to opportunity, and areas experiencing significant investment in transit service or other significant capital improvements.

GS 10.5	Apply an inclusive process in all area planning efforts that prioritizes equity-driven community engagement and centers the voices of historically marginalized and underrepresented communities.
GS 10.6	Adopt processes that increase transparency and accountability in the development and implementation of area plans.
GS 10.7	Develop area plans that reflect the unique characteristics and local vision to become more equitable, vibrant, and resilient in the future.
GS 10.8	Develop and implement strategies, identified in partnership with affected communities, to achieve equitable transit-oriented development in areas at risk of displacement that have high-capacity transit.
GS 10.9	Ensure future area plans are consistent with and implement the vision in the Comprehensive Plan and are coordinated with and reflect other City plans and strategies.


Annexation
DISCUSSION
Several areas of unincorporated land lie immediately south of the Seattle city limits. King County currently provides services to these areas. The state's Growth Management Act (GMA) anticipates that all areas within the county's urban growth boundary will eventually be annexed or incorporated and become part of a city. Generally, cities are considered better able to raise the revenue needed to meet local community needs and better positioned to plan for and invest in local communities.
The annexation process, which is a collaboration of city, county, and community stakeholders, is informed by local input and analysis of service needs, costs, and resources.
The Countywide Planning Policies have designated three Potential Annexation Areas (PAAs) that in the past Seattle has indicated an intention to annex into the city sometime in the future. Figure 11 shows the locations Seattle has identified as PAAs, the largest of which is the North Highline PAA.
GOAL

GS G11	Seattle has established a process for potential annexation of all Potential Annexation Areas through a negotiated process that meets the needs of the City and affected residents.
POLICIES

GS 11.1	Designate unincorporated land for potential annexation where the area has access, or can easily be connected, to City services.
GS 11.2	Cooperate with adjacent jurisdictions, as needed, in order to reach equitable and balanced resolutions about jurisdictional boundaries for the remaining unincorporated areas abutting city limits and ensure any boundary-change

agreements will result in an equitable distribution of revenues and costs, including asset transfer and the development, maintenance, and operation of facilities.
GS 11.3	Use tools and strategies to meet community needs in PAAs, such as transferring permitting authority, service and infrastructure financing, and identifying appropriate funding sources.
GS 11.4	Work with King County to establish pre-annexation agreements that identify mutual interests and ensure coordinated planning and compatible development until annexation is feasible.
GS 11.5	Collaborate with King County to develop a process for future annexation of Seattle's PAAs that can be achieved within the current 20-year planning period.
GS 11.6	Consider annexation requests by the residents of unincorporated areas and engage communities within and adjacent to PAAs in the annexation planning process to ensure that the desires and needs of the community, particularly BIPOC, low-income, and other residents who have historically been marginalized from shaping policy, are centered in the process.

Potential Annexation Areas, Figure 11











