Arts and Culture
Foreword by Owen Oliver (Quinault/Isleta Pueblo)
In 2018, I applied to a position at the City of Seattle to become the first Indigenous intern in the Office of Planning and Community Development (OPCD). OPCD, which was a bureaucratic mystery to me, soon gave me insight into the important structures that make a city succeed or fail. I took on the position as an undergraduate student at the University of Washington to move out of my comfort zone and attempt to understand how and if Coast Salish values could be implemented into the planning process of the city. For my entire life, I only saw our knowledge systems presented as artwork around the city. Rarely did I witness the authentic expression of place that combines our traditions with our history, language, and ceremony. Skeptically, I began researching Indigenous city planning texts, videos, and case studies. I even studied abroad to the University of British Columbia and took one of the few Indigenous Urban Planning classes in the world. This interest became clearer when I was introduced to members of the  advise the New Zealand Planning Institute on the integration of their cultural perspectives in urban

Aotearoa (New Zealand). I asked them what does success look like for the Papa Pounamu? Quickly and almost as if it were prepared beforehand, a member said:
You could reach back in time, grab a chief and walk him down King Street.
There would be enough stuff to let him know he'd be home.

Since then, I have thought about this statement, using this framing in the work I do today. And while I often felt jealous of how other cities were fast-tracking this inclusion, those other places weren't my home. The answer from Papa Pounamu relates to what is unique about the land and culture we still have in Seattle. It prompts reflecting and building on our own frameworks that help us implement arts and culture in Seattle. The response to creating success is an active relationship with the ancestors in the area. The chief isn't dropped off by himself, but you are actively walking beside him, with him. Together you both are observers on an ordinary street or even one that so strongly juxtaposes a chief on a street named after the Western conceptualization of a chief... a King. And if you've succeeded in letting the chief know that he's in his homelands, you've accomplished retaining his sense of place in a constantly changing urban environment. In a broader sense, it's not about the Papa Pounamu, but about the individual who is imagining how they would bring any person of importance, father, mother, aunt, uncle, matriarch, language keeper, fisherman, elder, or youth into the vision.
A strong sense of place has always been the lifeblood of the Seattle community. Unmistakable views of Tahoma (Mt. Rainier). The deep emerald greens of the Cascades and the Olympics. Foggy mornings and liquid sunshine afternoons. We are neighbors to the glacially carved Salish Sea, home to ravens, orcas, and sand-burrowing geoducks.
With this shared appreciation of the landscape, we can continue to build the policies and implement them in the 2035 Comprehensive Plan. We can get closer to being able to bring not only an ancestor of these lands to understanding that they are home but extending it to all the distinct cultural communities in Seattle. Not just the people of the past but everyone who's contributed to making Seattle extraordinary. Those communities' ancestors should be walked through a place that was built and cherished by their descendants. Seattle is already special in this situation, we've been indebted to The Gang of Four (Larry Gossett, Roberto Maestas, "Uncle Bob" Santos, Bernie Whitebear), nourished from P-Patches, and spoiled by grunge. Our communities and cultural spaces are an extension of the environment. They always have been. We can be one of the first metropolitan areas on the West Coast to lead with how we situate arts and culture through a lens of making all of our ancestors proud and our descendants thankful. It's us in the present that need to be proactive.
Art also needs to be channeled from anger, fear, and pain. It can allow for unheard communities to be known and amplified. It lets us know where we've failed in the past and how we can be accountable in the future. It lets us know how we can appreciate the things that the older generation didn't have. It lets us wonder, would a chief, whose name was given to our city, feel at home near King Street Station? Where much of his life he knew it as d id

Introduction
Arts and culture are part of Seattle's rich history and play an important role in Seattle's future as a vibrant city where diverse communities will thrive. From the Coast Salish people, original stewards of this place, through colonization and waves of newcomers from around the world, the arts and culture of the people of this region enrich our lives and inspire our collective and individual creativity and innovation.
Arts and culture extend to all aspects of civic life for people of all ages. The city's arts and cultural scene creates jobs and attracts visitors, customers, and highly skilled workers to the area. At the same time, arts and culture play an important social role by nurturing a welcoming and diverse urban community. Arts and culture can expand perspectives and encourage empathy toward people with different experiences. They help cultivate a greater appreciation and understanding of diverse cultures across Seattle.
The Arts and Culture element of this Plan outlines goals and policies related to the arts, cultural institutions, cultural preservation and place-keeping, the creative economy, and arts-education. Together these aspects of the city encompass a broad range of people, activities, spaces, and levels of involvement. The City is committed to supporting the arts and to offering a greater experience for arts consumers and creators of art across Seattle. Making arts and culture accessible to all requires programs that represent Seattle's diverse communities.
Experiencing arts and culture should be fun and challenging. It should also be accessible so that it can be enjoyed regularly by all. There are many ways to experience art. It can be created or observed or collaborated on. From tangible, physical objects, books, and digital works to experiences, gatherings, performances, and oral histories, the Seattle arts scene has many different points of entry. Cultural spaces are varied and can range from traditional theaters, galleries, and studios to schools, parks, libraries, and coffee shops.


Cultural Spaces, Place-making, and Place-keeping
DISCUSSION
Every successful neighborhood includes cultural spaces, which not only house a range of cultural activity but also help define the very social character and identity of neighborhoods. This includes a wide variety of community gathering spaces where people engage with a myriad of artforms and can support artists, watch performances, listen to authors and storytellers, and learn dance and other artforms. Creative place-making and place-keeping uses arts and culture to increase the vibrancy of neighborhoods, cities, and regions.
Cultural spaces help define the social character and identity of our city and neighborhoods. As such, cultural spaces should reflect Seattle's diverse cultural communities. Cultural spaces are often the first lost when communities experience gentrification. Seattle has a rich ecosystem of organizations working to establish, support, and preserve arts and cultural life and prevent displacement in

communities at risk, including Seattle's Indigenous community, BIPOC residents of the Central Area and other historically redlined neighborhoods, and the Chinatown International District.
By 2044, Seattle's neighborhoods will have cultural spaces including theaters, galleries, art-house cinemas, museums, music venues, and artist studios that reflect the rich cultural diversity of our communities, uplifting both those whose ancestors have been here for countless generations and those whose families have moved here more recently. Communities will uplift each other through culturally relevant programming, celebration, and gathering.
GOAL

AC G1	All neighborhoods in Seattle include affordable cultural spaces that enhance urban design; promote cultural awareness, understanding, and pride; and are accessible to of people of all ages and abilities and reflect Seattle's culturally diverse communities.
POLICIES

AC 1.1	Maintain an inventory of both public and private cultural spaces that includes information about the cultural communities reflected in these spaces.
AC 1.2	Create incentives to preserve or expand space for artists, arts organizations, cultural workers, musicians, music organizations, and other cultural uses.
AC 1.3	Identify and pursue opportunities to make surplus City-owned property available to artists, musicians, and arts and cultural organizations.
AC 1.4	Encourage the adaptive reuse of historic community structures, such as meeting halls, schools, and religious buildings, for uses that continue their role as neighborhood anchors.
AC 1.5	Support public-private partnerships that provide affordable space to artists and arts organizations, musicians, and cultural organizations.
AC 1.6	Encourage partnerships to make public and institutional spaces, such as parks, community centers, libraries, hospitals, schools, universities, and City-owned places, available for arts, musicians, and culture.
AC 1.7	Partner with communities to designate cultural districts that reflect existing and hoped for clusters of cultural spaces and activations.
AC 1.8	Encourage partnerships between the public, private, and nonprofit sectors to engage in creative place-making/or place-keeping projects, particularly as part of subarea and local area planning.
AC 1.9	Provide grants and other resources, through coordination among City departments and other non-City partners, that support communities in making their own art, music, and culture.

AC 1.10	Encourage private developers to work with local artists to incorporate culturally relevant art in new development.
AC 1.11	Invest in cultural spaces that reflect and uplift the cultures of communities who historically thrived in Seattle's neighborhoods, especially BIPOC communities that have been impacted by displacement.
AC 1.12	Encourage preservation of community murals and other artworks.

AC 1.13	Incorporate Lushootseed and other Indigenous languages throughout Seattle's neighborhoods in public spaces, natural, and built environments.


Public Art
DISCUSSION
Seattle strives to be a center of innovation and creativity. When the City's 1% for Art program was initially adopted in 1973, we were one of the first cities in the country to require that funds for eligible City capital improvement projects be used to commission, purchase, and install artwork in a variety of settings. More recently, City departments are finding more creative ways to collaborate with local artists earlier in the planning phases of capital projects and in the creation of plans that will incorporate public art in more of our public places.
In 2044, more art will be integrated throughout Seattle's neighborhoods and reflect the cultural heritage of the diverse communities who live here. Visitors and locals alike encounter art in parks, libraries, and community centers-as well as on roadways, bridges, and other public spaces- enriches people's daily lives and gives voice and visibility to artists of all backgrounds and cultures. The City's public art collection will continue to grow through the City's 1 Percent for Art program, which requires that 1 percent of the funds from eligible capital improvement projects be set aside for the commission, purchase, and installation of artworks in a variety of settings.
GOAL

AC G2	Seattle's neighborhoods reflect creative expression and original artwork where diverse communities see their cultural identities and feel welcomed.
POLICIES

AC 2.1	Prioritize BIPOC, LGBTQIA, and artists with disabilities for new public art as part of capital improvement projects.
AC 2.2	Include artists, especially artists whose cultural communities are at risk of displacement, early in the planning and design of capital improvements.
AC 2.3	Prioritize locations for new public art where it is desired by the community, enhances the built environment, can be accommodated safely, and will be enjoyed by Seattle's diverse communities.

AC 2.4	Strengthen the diversity of expression in public art to embrace a variety of artists, sites, disciplines, and media to fully reflect the cultural diversity of the city.
AC 2.5	Create meaningful opportunities for public participation, particularly by members of surrounding communities, in the process of planning, selecting, and implementing of public art projects.
AC 2.6	Promote and support art experiences that reflect and shape the identity of a place.
Design civic space to include public art that highlights the culture of each neighborhood and the diverse communities that reside there and enable and encourage opportunities for engagement by the community.
AC 2.7	When commissioning culturally relevant artwork, hire artists who are part of that cultural community.


Creative Economy
DISCUSSION
Seattle's creative economy is integral to the character of our city and is a powerful sector of our local economy. From innovative musicians and visual artists to locally supported media outlets with a global impact, to the Indigenous communities that stewarded these lands for countless generations, Seattle has a rich cultural heritage.
Encompassing a wide variety of arts and cultural businesses, ranging from nonprofit museums, symphonies, and theaters, to for-profit film, architecture, and advertising companies, the creative economy also includes thousands of independent artists working in Seattle who were particularly hard hit by the COVID-19 pandemic. Many local artists, especially BIPOC artists, are finding it increasingly difficult to live and create their art in Seattle. We are planning for a future in 2044 when Seattle's artists will thrive and no longer be at risk of displacement. Arts will be woven throughout our lives and accessible to residents, students, workers, and visitors of all ages.
When supported, arts and culture can help drive and enrich the City's future economic growth. Arts companies and their employees stimulate innovation, playing an important role in building and sustaining economic vibrancy in Seattle. They employ a creative workforce, spend money locally, generate government revenue, and are a cornerstone of tourism. The arts are also an economic- development tool, creating neighborhoods where businesses want to operate, and employees want to live. The creative economy also contributes to Seattle's high-quality of life, helping our city and region attract talent from across the globe. Encouraging creative economy activities in communities of color can provide pathways to new skills, jobs, and prosperity. In other words, the impact of the arts reaches far beyond aesthetics and entertainment.

GOAL

AC G3	Artists, creative professionals, cultural workers, and arts and cultural organizations are vital to Seattle's economic prosperity and have equitable opportunities to thrive in Seattle.
POLICIES

AC 3.1	Support arts and culture as part of an economic development strategy that leverages and expands the economic impact of the creative sector.
AC 3.2	Regularly assess the economic impact of Seattle's creative sector, including arts, culture, music, film, media, and nightlife.
AC 3.3	Encourage collective action towards greater racial equity through collaboration across the spectrum of traditional arts, culture, and creative economy businesses, especially businesses that rely on innovation, design, and inclusiveness.
AC 3.4	Encourage access to affordable housing, live-work spaces, and studio space for creative projects and arts, heritage, and cultural organizations.
AC 3.5	Improve technical and financial assistance programs and offer community building activities that better connect with and serve artists, musicians, arts organizations, cultural and live music venues of various sizes and at various stages of growth and that represent a broad range of cultures.
AC 3.6	Implement strategies that enhance access to technical and financial assistance for all artists and cultural organizations, particularly from historically underserved communities and those who are at higher risk of displacement.
AC 3.7	Work with public, not-for-profit, and private for-profit organizations to support artists, arts organizations, and cultural organizations to help them thrive.
AC 3.8	Integrate and invest in the creative expertise of a diversity of artists, creatives, cultural workers, and arts, culture, and heritage organizations across all City priorities and sectors.
AC 3.9	Pursue cultural investment strategies, funding programs, and community partnerships through an anti-racist and intersectional lens that centers shared decision-making and collective partnership with communities.
AC 3.10	Enhance access to a variety of arts, music, and cultural institutions and programs for youth, especially at-risk youth, non-English-speaking residents, seniors, the visually and hearing impaired, and people with other disabilities.
AC 3.11	Recognize the importance of live music and entertainment venues to the vibrancy of the city's culture and economy. Support the viability of these small businesses and nonprofits in areas at higher risk of displacement through policies that proactively engage and balance the interests of music venues and new residents.

Youth Development and Arts Education
DISCUSSION
All students in all schools should be given the chance to learn through the arts. The arts are a core component of basic education, uniquely suited to develop skills such as creative and critical thinking, communication, collaboration, and perseverance-skills directly linked to student success in school, career, and life.
Partnerships, both inside and outside of City government, are needed to ensure equitable access to arts education for all K-12 students, including after-school arts programs in diverse neighborhoods throughout the city. Through these in-school and after-school programs, experienced teaching artists, community groups, and cultural organizations can introduce children to all types of art, including visual arts, theater, dance, and film. Providing resources for arts programs in schools with high numbers of low-income students is especially important, as many schools provide arts programs with additional funding from parents, an option that may not be possible in some schools.
GOAL

AC G4	Young people (grades K-12) have arts and music education in every Seattle Public School and arts and cultural learning opportunities outside of school time so that Seattle youth have the creative skills they need to succeed in live and thrive in our communities.
POLICIES

AC 4.1	Partner with schools, community centers, libraries, and community organizations to offer culturally responsive arts curricula for young people and to provide professional development in arts education for teachers and community arts partners.
AC 4.2	Prioritize support for arts and music education that provide opportunities for youth furthest from educational and economic justice and for youth with limited or no access to art programs.
AC 4.3	Incorporate opportunities for youth engagement, participation, and leadership in the planning and design of programs and capital projects, especially in areas at higher risk of displacement.




