Transportation
Introduction
The Transportation element guides transportation investments to serve the city's current residents and businesses and to accommodate Seattle's future growth. Hundreds of thousands of residents and businesses in Seattle and throughout the region depend on the city's transportation system to access jobs, services, and community facilities, and to deliver freight and goods. Thousands more people will depend on it in the next twenty years as the city and region continue to grow.
In Seattle's future, a robust transportation system should:

Help to build a more equitable city where all people have access to a safe and affordable transportation system that meets their daily needs for mobility.
Contribute to a safer city by working to eliminate serious injuries and fatalities on city streets.
Create an interconnected city where people have reliable, easy-to-use travel options.

Support a more vibrant city with streets and sidewalks that generate economic and social activity, adding to the city's overall health, prosperity, and happiness.
Contribute to a more affordable city with high-quality and affordable transportation options that allow people to spend their money on other things.
Create a more sustainable and resilient city with greatly reduced greenhouse gas emissions from our transportation system.
Seattle's transportation system in 2044 will look very different than it does now. Light rail transit, streetcar routes, and frequent bus networks will be much more extensive, with light rail extending through more of the city and providing connections to Bellevue, Redmond, Shoreline, and Lynnwood. New technological innovations in transportation such as smart parking, shared transportation options (such as bike share and car share services), and driverless vehicles will change the way people move through Seattle. This Plan will guide the City's future actions to address these and other changes. The Plan will also shape a transportation future where all residents, especially in our most vulnerable and underinvested communities, benefit equitably.
Seattle already has a core network of streets serving a highly urbanized land use pattern. There is no room for major new streets, and it is neither feasible nor desirable to widen existing streets, which creates challenges but also opportunities as the City plans for growth. Therefore, we must use the streets and sidewalks we have in the most efficient way possible. This means prioritizing street space so that it can be used by the most people, at most times of the day, and in a variety of ways.
While many people still rely on a personal car as their best or only transportation option, the City plans to make travel more efficient and predictable for all by offering high-quality travel alternatives. It also means reimagining the way that we use the right-of-way to include multiple public uses and amenities that make our neighborhoods and the city as a whole more livable.
The One Seattle Plan is coordinated with and provides policy guidance for implementation of the Seattle Transportation Plan, an integrated strategy to invest in multiple modes of travel to meet Seattle's future needs. The Seattle Transportation Plan provides more detailed direction for all of the transportation investments that Seattle will need over the next 20 years, including facilities that address non-automobile modes of travel-walking, biking, and transit-as well as freight movement and a continued important role for private automobile travel.
To support the goals and policies in this element, the Transportation Appendix contains inventories of transportation facilities, and an analysis of the transportation needs over the next 20 years as we implement this Plan's growth strategy.


Supporting the Seattle Growth Strategy
DISCUSSION
The One Seattle Plan anticipates a future where Seattle continues to grow in the coming decades toward a population of one million. The level of growth, as well as how and where we grow, will have a big effect on future transportation needs. The development pattern described in the Growth

Strategy and Land Use elements of this Plan will have a major influence on future transportation needs and shape how we plan for the City's transportation system.
In the City's new Growth Strategy, every area of Seattle has an important role in accommodating growth. This includes planning for compact walkable Regional, Urban, and Neighborhood Centers with a mix of uses. It includes more low-scale housing options in Urban Neighborhoods across the city. The strategy aims to make it easy to walk and bike to local shops and services. Planning for employment space will continue to focus on our Regional and Urban centers. Manufacturing and Industrial Centers will focus additional employment and economic activity near port, freight, and other key infrastructure.
Crucial to the success of the Growth Strategy is reliable transportation to, from, and within these places. This will require a transportation system that includes many methods of travel for all trips throughout the day, including during the evening and on weekends. Automobile and freight access to property will remain important for accommodating growth throughout the city. In addition, transportation facilities that connect to and support the city's industrial areas are important to the city's economy.
The Growth Strategy builds on the idea of complete communities where residents have access to their daily needs - shops, amenities, schools, parks, places of employment - via an easy and enjoyable walk, bike, roll, or transit trip. Many areas for future growth in the city already have a rich network of transportation options; others, including neighborhoods that are home to BIPOC and other communities that have experienced a history of under-investment, have gaps that must be filled over time. The One Seattle Plan aims to strike a balance between serving the areas that will see the most growth and equitably providing transportation services to all who need it.
GOAL

TG 1	Transportation decisions, strategies, and investments support the growth strategy for the City and the region and are coordinated with this Plan's land use goals.
POLICIES

T 1.1	Provide safe and reliable multimodal transportation facilities and services to promote and accommodate the growth that this Plan anticipates citywide, including centers of various types and sizes and urban neighborhoods across the city.
T 1.2	Design transportation infrastructure in Regional, Urban, and Neighborhood centers to support compact, accessible, and walkable neighborhoods for all ages and abilities, with specific consideration for young children and their caregivers.
T 1.3	Plan for transportation improvements in Regional Centers that maintain and enhance a rich network of transit, pedestrian, and bicycle facilities and access to light rail and other regional connections.
T 1.4	Plan for transportation improvements within and between Urban Centers that provide access to high-capacity or frequent transit and maintain and expand pedestrian and bicycle facilities.

T 1.5	Plan for transportation investments within Neighborhood Centers and to surrounding Urban Neighborhood areas that prioritize walking and biking on safe, comfortable, and enjoyable routes to meet every day needs and that enhance connections to transit.
T 1.6	Design transportation facilities to be compatible with planned land uses, with consideration of the planned scale and character of the surrounding neighborhood.
T 1.7	Provide a variety of affordable travel options, including pedestrian, transit, and bicycle facilities, to better meet the needs of historically underserved communities.
T 1.8	Identify the potential impacts of transportation investments on communities that are at risk of displacement and collaborate across City departments to mitigate those impacts through project design and construction and implementation of anti- displacement strategies that enable households, businesses, and cultural anchors to remain in place.
T 1.9	Invest in transportation projects and programs that further progress toward meeting Seattle's environmental goals and targets and reduce dependence on personal automobiles.
T 1.10	Pursue strategies to reduce drive-alone trips in order to increase the efficiency of the city's transportation network for the movement of people and goods and to support our safety and climate goals.


Streets Designed for Everyone
DISCUSSION
To serve our needs today and in the future, the public street space in Seattle needs to accommodate different travel functions and community uses. Because it will be difficult to expand our available public street space in any significant way, it is important for the City to use the existing streets in ways that meet our shared priorities and enhance quality of life for all residents. This section of the Plan establishes the policy framework for making those decisions.
In planning for how to use streets, we consider the need to provide space for pedestrian activities, travel ways for various types of vehicles, and a flex area along the curb for making transitions and addressing critical building access and loading needs. Pedestrian activities include walking as well as access to bus shelters, bike racks, and sidewalk caf s. The curb provides space for passenger and freight delivery, solid waste collection and storage, vehicle and bike parking, bus stops and layover.
In order to meet multiple needs, there are opportunities to reallocate space currently dedicated to vehicles, particularly vehicle storage, to be available as places for people, including open streets, shared streets, parklets, play streets, and other activating uses of the street. Providing spaces for all these functions efficiently and where they are needed helps make the most of a limited resource.

Not every function can fit in every street. The goals and policies in this section provide direction on integrating and, where necessary, prioritizing functions within the different parts of a street. These policies also recognize that collectively two or more streets can combine to serve as a "complete corridor," since not every street can accommodate every need.
GOAL

TG 2	Seattle's streets accommodate and promote safe, comfortable, efficient movement of people and goods and include inviting spaces for community within the right-of- way.
POLICIES

T 2.1	Devote space in the right-of-way to accommodate multiple functions of mobility, access for commerce and people, activation, landscaping, and better management of vehicle parking.
T 2.2	Ensure that the street network accommodates multiple travel modes and users, including transit, freight movement, pedestrians, people with disabilities, young children and their caregivers, bicycles, general purpose traffic, and shared transportation options.
T 2.3	Plan for emerging mobility and delivery devices, vehicles, and services, where appropriate.
T 2.4	Prioritize functions in the right-of-way to address safety, compatibility with adjacent land uses, and balanced accommodation of multiple travel modes that provide alternatives to automobile travel.
T 2.5	Use pedestrian design guidance in the Right-of-Way Improvements Manual and guidance from the Seattle Transportation Plan to determine adequacy of the pedestrian realm, before allocating space to the flex zone or travel way, and, within the pedestrian realm, prioritize space to address safety concerns, network connectivity, and activation.
T 2.6	Prioritize safety when addressing mobility needs in the street travelway, followed by the implementation of the recommended networks and facilities identified in the Seattle Transportation Plan.
T 2.7	Implement curb space management strategies such as on-street parking pricing and time limits, load zones and other critical access needs for buildings, and residential parking management to promote transportation choices, enhance the efficient delivery of goods and services, improve customer access, and enable public space activations in curb lanes.
T 2.8	Address critical access needs for buildings when affected by transportation projects and substantial private redevelopment by re-allocating load zones, encouraging

shared parking amongst area businesses, and overall considering an area-wide curb management plan.
T 2.9	If a building does not have off-street loading access, whether on-property or via an alley, it should have its critical access needs provided for at the curb, achieved by maintaining curb space for commerce, solid waste, building maintenance, and accessible pick up/drop off.
T 2.10	Design and manage the transportation system, including the curb space, so that people with limited mobility have safe and convenient access to their destinations.
T 2.11	To resolve potential conflicts in the right-of- way, employ the following tactics: Implement transportation and parking-demand management strategies to encourage more efficient use of the existing right-of-way.
Allocate needed functions across a corridor composed of several streets or alleys if all functions cannot fit in a single street.
Share space between travel modes and uses where safe and where possible over the course of the day.
Prioritize assignment of space to shared and shorter duration uses. Encourage off-street accommodation for non-mobility uses, including parking and transit layover.
Meet critical access needs of establishments to ensure parcels, goods, services, passenger, and solid waste services can be done safely and efficiently.
T 2.12	Design sidewalks in Regional and Urban Centers and areas designated as pedestrian zones to meet the dimensional standards as specified in the Right-of-Way Improvements Manual to foster vibrant pedestrian environments in these areas.
T 2.13	Preserve and enhance the boulevard network both for travel and as a usable open- space system for active transportation modes.
T 2.14	Maintain, preserve, and enhance the City's alleys as a valuable network for access, loading and unloading for freight, and utility operations, and where appropriate opportunities for public space.
T 2.15	Design and allocate space in the right-of-way to prioritize the health, safety, and enjoyment of young children and their caregivers.
T 2.16	Develop strategies that prioritize walking, biking, transit, and public spaces on streets over parking.
T 2.17	Create vibrant public spaces in and near the right-of-way that foster social interaction, promote access to walking, bicycling, and transit options, and enhance the public realm.

T 2.18	Reallocate street space currently used for vehicle storage and general-purpose travel to support a variety of people-oriented uses, such as gathering, playing, walking, and biking in strategic locations.
T 2.19	Co-create and design with the community shared streets that prioritize people, public life, and community functions, and that deemphasize vehicles.


Expanding Transportation Options
DISCUSSION
This Plan emphasizes strategies to increase travel options, moving away from reliance on single- occupant vehicle (SOV) travel, and toward more trips made by carpool, transit, biking, walking, and other alternative ways to get around the city.
Transit, bicycling, walking, and shared transportation services reduce collisions, stress, noise, and air pollution, while increasing social contact, economic vitality, affordability, and overall health. They also help use right-of-way space more efficiently and at lower costs. Finally, with a large portion of our vehicle fleet still reliant on internal combustion engines, reducing car travel will help the city reduce greenhouse gas emissions sooner. The best way to get Seattleites to take advantage of these options is to make them easy and enjoyable choices for people of all ages and abilities and accessible to people at all income levels.
Strategies for increasing travel options include providing more housing options in centers that are well served by transit, along with completing the City's transit, bicycle, and pedestrian networks. The City has integrated its plans for individual travel modes into the Seattle Transportation Plan.
While not everyone can always walk, bike, use a car-share service, or ride transit, the City can reduce the number of drive-alone trips that residents, employees, and visitors take, and even reduce the need to own a personal vehicle. If the City offers people safe, affordable, and comfortable travel choices, they will be more likely to use them. Improving transportation choices can protect the environment, enhance the local economy, and support healthy and sustainable communities. If more people use different types of transportation during the busiest times of day (generally the late- afternoon peak commute time), more people and goods can get to their destinations in a reasonable time. Reducing drive-alone trips at this time of day is consistent with the City's overall commute-trip reduction goals.
In helping residents make these decisions, the City must consider all aspects of the transportation system. One way the City can affect many aspects of the system is through transportation demand management, a technique that aims to reduce travel impacts on the system, particularly drive-alone trips at congested times of the day. Transportation demand management includes looking at the role of parking, since its availability, cost, and proximity to destinations are important considerations for many as they choose whether to drive or take advantage of other travel options. Especially for people using transit, there is a need to provide efficient ways to get to and from the transit. This is often called first-mile and last-mile travel because it can involve getting from home to a transit

station on one end of a trip and from a transit station to a job on the other end. The first and last mile can often be traveled by walking, biking, ride sharing, or local bus service. To ensure we are doing this equitably, we need to improve accessibility to frequent and reliable transit in neighborhoods with proportionally more people who have lower incomes or depend heavily on transit.
Plans that the City has developed for individual travel modes are addressed in an integrated approach described in the Seattle Transportation Plan (2024). For more information on the specific investments that the City anticipates and plans to make to support transit and bicycle use, refer to the maps in figures 12 through 15 on the following pages. For more information about the investments the City plans to make in infrastructure that supports walking, see the Seattle Transportation Plan.


Frequent Transit Network Targets, Figure 13

Frequent: Better than 10 minutes Frequent: 10 minutes
Frequent: 15 minutes Other Transit
Note, the network in downtown Seattle is not assigned toa FTN target due to the many converging routes on those streets.

Light Rail
Existing/ Under Construction	

Future


Link Light Rail Expansions and RapidRide Corridors, Figure 14

Existing/ Under Construction
Future	
Future Infill Station

RapidRide and Bus Rapid Transit IBRTI
Existing RapidRide Future RapidRide Future BRT
Potential future RapidRide corridor or extension identified in Metro Connects interim network.
Future restructuring of local service




GOAL

TG 3	People's mobility needs are met with equitable access to multiple transportation options.
POLICIES

T 3.1	Expand transportation options to and within Regional, Urban, and Neighborhood centers, where most of Seattle's population and job growth will occur.
T 3.2	Invest equitably in initiatives, projects, and programs that aggressively encourage mode shift towards low-emissions transportation options for all trips, regardless of location, distance, time of day, and trip purpose.
T 3.3	Develop and maintain a high-quality network of connected bicycle, pedestrian, and transit facilities.
T 3.4	Strengthen the coordination among land use, housing, transportation, and economic strategies to reduce overall household travel costs.
T 3.5	Plan for and develop transportation systems and facilities so that all residents, regardless of income, age, ability, and vehicle-ownership, have access to a wide range of affordable travel options.
T 3.6	Improve transit access to underserved neighborhoods and populations through expansion of existing transit services, programs that reduce transit fares, and new private sector partnerships to provide first- and last-mile services.
T 3.7	Provide equitable transportation access through direct subsidies and tailored mobility services for disadvantaged populations, including people with mobility impairment or low income.
T 3.8	Develop a citywide transit system that includes a variety of transit modes to meet passenger capacity needs with frequent, reliable, accessible, and safe service to a wide variety of destinations throughout the day and week, including commute and non-commute trips.
T 3.9	Prioritize transit investments on the basis of current or potential ridership demand and mode shift, service to populations heavily reliant on transit, and opportunities to leverage funding.
T 3.10	Improve access to transit by supporting first-/last-mile connections, including on- demand shared rides to trunk line stations and improved safety and walking infrastructure connecting to transit stops and stations.
T 3.11	Improve east-west mobility between neighborhoods and destinations, especially as additional light rail service begins, and bus service is redeployed.

T 3.12	Make transit services affordable to low-income residents through programs that reduce household transportation costs.
T 3.13	Optimize bus, train, and streetcar operations by adjusting signals and providing transit-only or transit-priority lanes to promote competitive travel times for transit relative to automobile travel.
T 3.14	Partner with Sound Transit, King County Metro, and other transit providers to continuously improve the overall transit experience, including improvements to system capacity, accessibility, and system facilities and amenities.
T 3.15	Provide high-quality pedestrian, bicycle, and bus transit access to high-capacity transit stations in order to support transit ridership and reduce single-occupant vehicle trips.
T 3.16	Pursue strategies for the allocation and design of the right-of-way in light rail station areas and in high-capacity transit station hubs to create and expand networks, spaces, and districts that prioritize pedestrians and reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
T 3.17	Partner with private mobility providers, such as car share, bike share, and taxis, to expand access to their services throughout the city and reduce pricing terms for lower-income individuals.
T 3.18	Develop and maintain bicycle and pedestrian facilities, including public stairways, that enhance the predictability and safety of all users of the street and that connect to a wide range of key destinations throughout the city.
T 3.19	Look for opportunities to reestablish or improve connections across State and Federal highways by creating new crossings, enhancing streets where highways cross overhead, or constructing lids, especially where these can also enhance opportunities for development, open space, income-restricted affordable housing, and neighborhood cohesion.
T 3.20	In areas that currently lack complete sidewalks, ensure coordinated development of sidewalks and pedestrian safety infrastructure in line with anticipated higher-density development envisioned in the Growth Strategy.
T 3.21	Prioritize bicycle and pedestrian investments on the basis of increasing use, safety, connectivity, equity, health, livability, and opportunities to leverage funding.
T 3.22	Develop facilities and programs, such as bike sharing and micromobility options, that encourage short trips to be made by walking, biking, or other zero-emission mobility devices.
T 3.23	Implement improvements, such as curb ramps, accessible pedestrian signals, accessible parking, and accessible transit stops, to make traveling in Seattle more accessible for people of all abilities.

T 3.24	Support and plan for innovation in privately provided transportation options such as shared mobility, including car sharing, bike sharing, micromobility, taxis, and transportation network companies, that can increase travel options and enhance mobility.
T 3.25	Anticipate and leverage innovative transportation technologies to meet community values and goals, including safety, equity, affordability, and climate response.
T 3.26	Adapt streets for new and evolving forms of mobility devices, such as commercial or private cargo bikes, e-scooters, personal delivery devices, and low-speed electric vehicles (LSEVs), to create more travel options beyond traditionally sized vehicles.
T 3.27	Develop and implement strategies to manage the evolution toward s (CAVs), recognizing that government and industry must partner to deliver their anticipated benefits safely.


Building a Green Transportation System
DISCUSSION
Encouraging the use of non-automobile travel options supports not only the City's growth strategy but also its environmental goals, including those related to climate change. Cars, buses, trucks, and other motorized transportation make up Seattle's largest source of greenhouse gas emissions, and the City's Climate Action Plan sets high standards for reducing greenhouse gas emissions. Using more fuel-efficient transportation options to move larger numbers of people on well-designed and well-maintained streets is a crucial step to creating a healthy urban environment, especially in neighborhoods and communities, including communities of color, that have been disproportionally impacted by pollution. By reducing the need for personal car use, the City can also reduce congestion and provide more opportunities to reallocate public right-of-way for trees and landscaping. Providing and promoting a wider variety of transportation options is also integral to achieving these environmental goals.
GOAL

TG 4	Seattle's transportation system promotes healthy communities, protects and improves our environmental quality, and contributes to a future free of carbon pollution.
POLICIES

T 4.1	Accelerate and scale strategies to reduce transportation related greenhouse gas emissions consistent with the long-term goal of net-zero citywide emissions by 2050.
T 4.2	Accelerate and scale reduction in vehicle miles traveled (VMT) to achieve 20% reduction in total VMT by 2030 relative to the baseline set in the City's 2013 Climate Action Plan.

T 4.3	Implement projects, policies, programs, and street designs, including reduction of general-purpose travel lanes, to reduce drive-alone vehicle trips and vehicle-miles traveled.
T 4.4	Pursue integrated neighborhood-scale strategies, such as low-carbon/low-pollution neighborhoods (LPNs), to meet our goals for a healthy environment and greenhouse gas reductions.
T 4.5	Manage the transportation system, including movement of both people and goods, to support a shift to electrification, clean fuels, and smaller vehicles, such as cargo bikes, e-scooters, and other emerging mobility options, reducing use of gas-powered vehicles over time.
T 4.6	Encourage the use of electric freight, transit, motor vehicles, and e-cargo bicycles and the expansion of electric vehicle charging stations for personal vehicles, private fleets, and transit.
T 4.7	Accommodate public charging infrastructure to promote equitable access and transition to electrified vehicles.
T 4.8	Improve freight mobility and access to pick up and delivery points in order to reduce truck idling, improve air quality, and minimize the impacts of truck parking and movement in residential areas.
T 4.9	Design and manage streets to promote green infrastructure, new technologies, and active transportation modes while addressing safety, accessibility, and aesthetics.
T 4.10	Enhance tree canopy and landscaping in the street right-of-way. T 4.11	Retrofit transportation facilities to improve fish passage.
T 4.12	Design and implement new and retrofitted transportation facilities with water quality and quantity stormwater system improvements to reduce roadway runoff pollution into natural drainage systems and the waters of the Puget Sound.


Supporting a Vibrant Economy
DISCUSSION
The movement of goods and services is critical to economic development in Seattle and the region. Seattle's businesses and residents rely on freight routes for safe and timely transportation of goods. Freight carriers depend on a well-functioning network of rail, water, air, and truck transportation.
The Seattle Transportation Plan identifies the city's overall truck freight network and prioritizes investments for freight mobility projects. This includes addressing the exponential growth in delivery trips to dispersed locations across the city and preparing for the changing needs of goods movement and delivery due to evolving consumer demand and overall population growth.

In addition to goods movement, a well-designed transportation network supports a thriving economy by enhancing access to jobs, businesses, schools, and recreation. This kind of easy access contributes to the success of our neighborhood business districts and small businesses and makes it easier for people to access their daily needs for goods and services. Enhancing freight mobility and access also enhances Seattle's role as the hub for regional goods movement and as a gateway to national and international suppliers and markets.
Figure 16 on the follow page shows the existing freight network identified in the Seattle Transportation Plan that is planned to meet the city's needs for freight movement over the next 20 years.

Freight Network, Figure 16


Freight Class
Limited Access Major truck street Minor truck street
First/Last Mile Connector


GOAL

TG 5	The transportation system improves mobility and access for goods and services to support and promote economic opportunity throughout the city.
POLICIES

T 5.1	Sustain and enhance the truck freight network that connects Manufacturing and Industrial Centers (MICs) to the city and region, enhances freight mobility and operational efficiencies, and promotes the city's economic health.
T 5.2	Enhance goods and services movement to, within, and between Seattle's MICs and Regional, Urban, and Neighborhoods centers.
T 5.3	Design, maintain, and operate freight corridors to provide for efficient movement of truck traffic to and from regional connectors.
T 5.4	Expand neighborhood delivery hubs to more locations to improve overall urban goods delivery throughout the city.
T 5.5	Use intelligent transportation system technology to alert motorists, bicyclists, and pedestrians to the presence and anticipated length of closures due to train crossings and bridge openings for water vessels.
T 5.6	Improve safety and operational conditions at rail crossings of city streets, including consideration of grade separation to mitigate delay and safety issues.
T 5.7	Work with freight stakeholders and the Port of Seattle to maintain and improve intermodal freight connections involving Port container terminals, rail yards, industrial areas, airports, and regional highways.
T 5.8	Support efficient and safe movement of goods by rail where appropriate and promote efficient operation of freight rail lines and intermodal yards.
T 5.9	Increase efficient and affordable transportation access to jobs, education, and workforce training in order to promote economic opportunity.
T 5.10	Promote freight demand management technologies and strategies that can consolidate urban goods delivery trips and encourage vehicles that are sized appropriately for an urban environment.
T 5.11	Encourage and create great streetscapes and activate public spaces in the right-of- way to promote economic activity.

Promoting Safe Travel for All
DISCUSSION
Safety guides every decision that the City makes for transportation system operation and design. People expect to feel safe as they use streets, transit facilities, sidewalks, and trails. Collisions involving pedestrians or people riding bicycles represent a high percentage of the serious injuries and fatalities in the city. When we invest in protecting our most vulnerable road users, such as pedestrians and bicyclists, we help build strong communities where residents and visitors are more likely to walk or bike, especially for short trips. Safer streets are also more efficient streets; they have fewer and less severe collisions, allowing people and goods to move safely and efficiently. In addition to making safety improvements, the City works to build a culture of mutual awareness between travelers. The City respects the right of all to travel safely regardless of how they choose to get around.
To lead with safety, we will:

Reduce vehicle speeds to increase safety.
Concentrate safety investments at the most collision-prone locations. Make all journeys safer, from departure to destination.
Provide safer routes to schools, parks, transit, community gathering spaces, and other common destinations.
The policies in this section reflect and build on the culture of Vision Zero, an approach to designing and managing our streets to eliminate traffic deaths and serious injuries. Vision Zero focuses on the most effective ways to reduce harm while creating a culture of care and dignity for all travelers. To achieve Vision Zero, we need to evolve our streets for slower speeds; limit conflict points between travelers; and focus on the safety of people walking, biking, and rolling. The Seattle Transportation Plan provides guidance to accelerate progress toward Vision Zero through a "Safe System" framework.
GOAL

TG 6	Seattle's transportation system is safe for everyone, particularly the most vulnerable travelers, such as children, older adults, BIPOC communities, people with disabilities, pregnant people, among others, especially when they are walking or cycling.
POLICIES

T 6.1	Work toward Seattle's Vision Zero goal to end traffic deaths and serious injuries on city streets by 2030 by focusing on the most effective and equitable ways to reduce harm.
T 6.2	Apply reduced speed limits that may be necessary to enhance safety.

T 6.3	Develop and implement programs to educate all users of the street on rules of the road, rights, and responsibilities.

T 6.4	Enhance safety at locations with heightened risks of conflict in the right-of-way, including at-grade railroad crossings and free-flowing ramps on and off city streets.
T 6.5	Improve safety for all modes of transportation on streets heavily used by trucks.

T 6.6	Guided by the federally recognized Safe System approach and Seattle's Transportation Equity Framework, make transportation safety and mobility investments in the most effective and equitable way, emphasizing design over punitive practices and individual level behavior change.
T 6.7	Make safety, particularly for the most vulnerable travelers, the top priority in all transportation plans and projects, including through project prioritization and delivery criteria.
T 6.8	Use complete street principles, traffic-calming, and neighborhood traffic control strategies to promote safe neighborhood streets and discourage cut-through traffic.
T 6.9	Improve pedestrian lighting, especially along transit routes and where connections between different travel options are made.


Connecting to the Region
DISCUSSION
Seattle is the largest employment and cultural center in the central Puget Sound region. As such, the city is a destination for people from all over the metropolitan area for work, shopping, entertainment, events, and recreation. The city is served by a number of state and regional transportation facilities, including two interstate highways; several state highways; a regional light rail, commuter rail, and bus system; a ferry network; waterways; and railroads. While the bulk of the Transportation element addresses transportation within the city limits, this section provides guidance for larger regional projects and facilities that serve Seattle. It also provides guidance for Seattle's participation in regional transportation planning and funding efforts.
GOAL

TG 7	Regional projects and programs affecting Seattle are consistent with City plans, policies, and priorities and help to connect the city with the surrounding region.
POLICIES

T 7.1	Coordinate with regional, state, and federal agencies, other local governments, and transit providers when planning and operating transportation facilities and services, especially those that reach beyond the city's borders.
T 7.2	Support completion of the freeway high-occupancy-vehicle lane system throughout the central Puget Sound region and continued use of that system for promoting more efficient travel.

T 7.3	Limit freeway capacity expansions intended primarily to accommodate drive-alone users to allow only spot improvements that enhance safety or remove operational constraints in specific locations.
T 7.4	Support a strong regional ferry system that maximizes the movement of people, freight, and goods.
T 7.5	Plan for the City's truck freight network to connect to the state and regional freight network and to continue providing good connections to regional industrial and warehouse uses.
T 7.6	Work with transit agency partners to expand and optimize cross-jurisdictional regional light rail and bus transit service investments that function as a single, coordinated system to encourage more trips to, from, and within Seattle on transit.
T 7.7	Work with regional transit agencies to plan for and provide service that is consistent with this Plan's growth strategy.
T 7.8	Support regional transportation pricing and tolling strategies that help manage regionwide transportation demand.
T 7.9	Work with neighboring jurisdictions and King County to integrate the City's bicycle network with regional bicycle facilities.
T 7.10	Collaborate with local, county, and regional agencies to promote transportation demand management, including to reduce cross-jurisdiction drive-alone trips.
T 7.11	Collaborate with county, regional, and state transportation partners, as well as employers, to adopt strategies to meet the transportation needs of people displaced from Seattle to continue to access community and cultural amenities and employment within the city.


Operating and Maintaining the Transportation System
DISCUSSION
Thoughtful operation and maintenance of the transportation system promotes safety, efficiency, infrastructure preservation, and a high-quality environment. Spending money on maintaining and preserving the system today can prevent spending more dollars on replacing parts of the system later. This is particularly true for the more expensive and vital transportation assets, such as pavement, sidewalks, parking pay stations, intelligent transportation system devices, traffic-signal infrastructure, and bridges.
Since the City makes and maintains its transportation improvements with taxpayer money, it must spend every dollar wisely and in a way that is consistent with the City's overall vision. The City keeps a comprehensive inventory of transportation assets that includes information about the condition of its most valuable assets. The City uses performance measures to decide whether and when to repair

or replace infrastructure. In addition to planning for future maintenance, the City must address the significant backlog of unmet maintenance needs that currently exists. Investments in operations and maintenance are also key opportunities to modernize our transportation system and to address the needs of BIPOC and other communities that have experienced historical underinvestment.
GOAL

TG 8	Transportation assets are maintained and renewed, ensuring the long-term viability of investments, reduced costs, and safe conditions.
POLICIES

T 8.1	Operate the transportation system in a way that balances the following priorities: safety, mobility, accessibility, social equity, place-making, infrastructure maintenance and modernization, and resident satisfaction.
T 8.2	Employ state-of-the-art intelligent transportation systems to increase efficiency of movement and reduce travel delays.
T 8.3	Use asset maintenance and replacement opportunities to not only improve the condition of transportation infrastructure and equipment, but to also enhance safety, reduce dependence on driving, promote sustainable travel options, and support economic vitality.
T 8.4	Explore innovative means of reducing maintenance costs such as converting right- of-way into other uses when appropriate.
T 8.5	Mitigate construction impacts from City and private projects on the use of the street right-of-way and on the operation of the transportation system, especially for vulnerable populations.
T 8.6	Focus resources for maintenance and improvements in neighborhoods that have been historically subject to underinvestment or are currently underserved.
T 8.7	Create training, youth employment, and living wage opportunities in the construction and major maintenance of transportation facilities for members of BIPOC and other communities with a history of underinvestment.


Funding the Investments We Need
DISCUSSION
The City's transportation network is vital to preserving the quality of life, prosperity, and health of all Seattleites. Only with adequate funding can Seattle continue to operate, maintain, and improve its transportation network.

Transportation funding comes from a variety of dedicated and flexible sources, including gas taxes, commercial parking taxes, bond sale revenues, grants, and voter-approved sources including property tax levies, vehicle license fees, and sales taxes.
In November 2015 Seattle voters approved the Levy to Move Seattle, which replaced the Bridging the Gap levy that expired at the end of 2015. The Levy to Move Seattle provided $930 million for transportation investments between 2016 and 2024 in three main categories: safety, congestion relief, and maintenance and preservation. This funding helped advance many of the policies in the previous Seattle 2035 Comprehensive Plan.
The City also has a commercial parking tax, which supports City transportation activities. In 2010 the City created the Seattle Transportation Benefit District (STBD), which has authority to generate revenues from additional sources not otherwise available to the City. The STBD imposed a vehicle license fee, which provides an additional dedicated financial resource for addressing transportation needs. In addition, Seattle voters approved increased funding for bus transit service in 2014, which adds bus service to many of the highest-ridership routes in the city. The STBD includes Proposition 1, also referred to as the 2020 Seattle Transit Measure (STM). The STM created a 0.15% sales tax, the equivalent of 15 cents on a $100 purchase. The sales tax, approved by voters in November 2020, generates over $50 million annually over six years to fund transit service, capital projects, and transit access programs like our Transportation Access Program.
In preparation for the end of the Levy to Move Seattle, the City is developing a Transportation Funding Plan to identify stable and secure funding for Seattle's transportation and mobility systems, including consideration of a levy or levies as one of multiple funding sources.
GOAL

TG 9	Transportation funding is sufficient to operate, maintain, and improve the transportation system that supports the City's transportation, land use, economic, environmental, equity, and other goals.
POLICIES

T 9.1	Develop a holistic multi-resource long-range funding plan to guide decisions about levies, ballot measures, the commercial parking tax, and other funding sources.
T 9.2	Work with regional and state partners to encourage a shift to greater reliance on user-based taxes and fees, and on revenues related to impacts on the transportation system and the environment.
T 9.3	In partnership with WSDOT and PSRC, build on a long history of stakeholder and community discussions to deliver an equitable road user charge that provides multiple benefits including:
managing travel demand;
reducing vehicle miles traveled and greenhouse gas emissions;
generating revenue to supplement or replace declining gas tax revenue; and using revenue to pay for equitable transportation investments and outcomes.

T 9.4	Leverage local funding resources by securing grants from regional, state, and federal sources, and through contributions from those who benefit from improvements.
T 9.5	Partner with other City departments, as well as regional transportation and public works agencies, to coordinate investments, maximize project integration, reduce improvement costs, and limit neighborhood and environmental justice impacts from construction of transportation facilities.
T 9.6	Make strategic investment decisions consistent with City plans and policies, including the 20-year growth strategy in this Plan.
T 9.7	Use multimodal level-of-service (LOS) standards for local arterials, transit, and facilities, including mobility benefits for all travelers in a corridor, in order to assess the performance of the transportation system and indicate potential need for transportation investments and demand management strategies as the city grows.
T 9.8	Assess the multimodal LOS standards over time and adjust as needed, based on review of other City transportation measures.
T 9.9	Prioritize investment by considering life-cycle costs and an asset management approach, defining appropriate levels of maintenance. Also consider safety, environmental benefits, reduction of greenhouse gas emissions, public health benefits, and race and social equity.
T 9.10	Consider use of transportation impact fees to help fund transportation system improvements needed to serve growth.
T 9.11	Develop prioritized lists of projects and programs, consistent with City policies, and actively pursue funds to implement those investments.
T 9.12	Plan to meet future transportation needs by preparing a six-year Capital Improvement Plan (CIP) that identifies anticipated projects, programs, and funding strategies, along with longer term transportation facilities plans and analyses that identify anticipate additional future transportation needs, costs, and potential revenue sources.
T 9.13	Identify and evaluate possible additional funding resources and/or alternative land use and transportation scenarios if the level of transportation funding anticipated falls short of the estimated amount.


















